the secretary of state was asked — what steps he is taking to help reduce waiting times at a&e departments . what steps he is taking to help reduce waiting times at a&e departments this government inherited an intolerable situation in a&e , where over a decade of tory failures left patients waiting in pain . we are doing the hard work needed to start repairing that damage . our new urgent and emergency care plan is backed by nearly £ 450 million , which will mean 800,000 fewer a&e patients waiting more than four hours this year , new urgent treatment centres , mental health crisis centres and almost 400 replacement ambulances . those are just some of the steps that we are taking to rebuild our national health service . i welcome the progress this uk labour government have made in reducing a&e waits in england . that sadly contrasts with a crisis in scotland , where recent figures revealed 2,472 scots waited over eight hours to be seen . jackie baillie rightly warned that “ lives are being put at risk ” under the snp , and it has been years since the scottish government last met any of their targets . does the secretary of state agree that only labour in westminster and in holyrood has a serious plan to back nhs staff and cut waiting times ? i agree with my hon . friend . there is no sign of the snp members this morning . they have obviously clocked off for the summer — or maybe they are just sparing their blushes , because the party has been in power for close to two decades in scotland and has been steadily driving the nhs into the ground . the chair of bma scotland has said , “ the nhs is dying before our eyes ” with the snp . it is on its fifth nhs recovery plan in less than four years . scotland needs a new direction with a scottish labour government . working in partnership , we will fix the nhs across the united kingdom and make it fit for the future . one of my first visits after being elected last year was to the a&e department at the william harvey hospital in my constituency , where 19 patients were being treated in the corridors and others faced long waits for treatment . i therefore welcome the progress that has been made so far on reducing a&e waiting times . however , too many people end up at a&es like the one at the william harvey because they have no other option . what are the government doing to increase care options in local communities , including the use of virtual wards to ensure that more people are treated closer to home and that patients in a&e are those in an emergency ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . it is unacceptable that corridor care became the norm under the conservatives . we will not accept it as normal ; it is not acceptable . ahead of this winter , we will require local nhs systems to develop and test plans to significantly increase the number of people receiving urgent care services outside hospital , including more paramedic - led care in the community , more patients seen by urgent community response teams , and better use of virtual wards . together , we will improve our emergency services and make sure that people get the right care in the right place and at the right time . the government have spoken passionately about how minor injuries units , such as the one at mount vernon hospital in my constituency , help to take the pressure off a&e by diverting less urgent cases for treatment elsewhere . i am grateful to the secretary of state for his time for a brief discussion about that last week . will he now respond to the 25,000 local people and my constituency neighbours , including configuration of services is a matter for local commissioners . however , let me take this opportunity to reassure the hon . gentleman that i have taken into account representations received from my right hon . friend in june , just 66 % of patients admitted to woking ’s local a&e at st peter ’s hospital were seen within four hours . that is way below both the national target and the national average of 76 % . will the secretary of state agree to investigate that to find out why my constituents of woking are facing such lengthy and unreasonable waiting times ? as the hon . gentleman knows , urgent and emergency care services have been struggling right across the country , but he is right to identify where there are serious and significant variations in performance . one of the focuses of this government is to try to reduce unwarranted variation from one nhs provider to another , so that we get consistently good standards of care across the country . i commit to write to him to further explain why there are particular challenges in his area and what we can do together to help resolve them . i call the shadow minister . respiratory syncytial virus — rsv — is a common reason for attendance at a&e and admission to hospital among older people , and i have raised this repeatedly . last week , the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation recommended that the rsv vaccine programme should be extended to the over-80s and those living in adult residential care homes . can the minister confirm that these vaccines will be available in time for this winter season ? i can certainly reassure the shadow minister on this . the minister for public health has already accepted that recommendation and is working at pace on implementation . may i wish the hon . lady well in the opposition reshuffle ? what assessment he has made of the potential impact of the 10 - year health plan for england on perinatal mental health . the 10 - year health plan sets out ambitious plans to boost mental health support across the country , including for women during the perinatal period . during the year to april 2025 , a record 64,805 women accessed maternal mental health services or specialist community perinatal mental health services , such as those at the whiteleaf centre in aylesbury . the department for education is also investing £ 500 million to roll out best start family hubs to all local authorities in england , which will also support new mums . i am really grateful to the minister for her answer and for her focus on this . i would like to ask about midwives , who do incredible work supporting parents and babies , including identifying and supporting women who are facing mental health challenges . we desperately need more of them , yet the royal college of midwives has found that eight out of 10 student midwives who are due to qualify this year are not confident that they will find jobs . what steps is the minister taking to ensure that newly qualified midwives are able to find work ? i recognise my hon . friend ’s great work in this place to support women on this issue . we recognise that newly qualified midwives are experiencing challenges in gaining that first role . that is partly due to the record number of midwives in post and to better retention rates . nhs england is working with employers , universities and regional midwifery leads to help midwives find those roles after qualification and to transition into workforce , and we will keep a close eye on that with them . in assessing the impact of the 10 - year plan on perinatal health for england , can the minister assure us that the lessons learned will be shared across the rest of the united kingdom , to enhance care quality and reduce regional disparities , especially in northern ireland ? the hon . gentleman makes an excellent point about the important need to share the learning across the united kingdom , and i will make sure that we do indeed make efforts to do that . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . over the weekend , the guardian reported that the number of women dying in the perinatal period had risen sharply since 2015 . families that have been failed , and health professionals feel that whether it is perinatal depression or unsafe births , lessons are not being learned and the same errors are repeated in review after review . alongside the inquiry that the secretary of state has launched , will the government immediately implement every action from the ockenden review and put an end to this national scandal in maternity service ? the hon . lady has raised a really important issue . she highlights the work that the secretary of state is putting in place to address these issues and finally bring all that together to produce a plan that will assure people , and we are working at pace to ensure that those recommendations are implemented . if he will make an assessment of the potential merits of siting a neighbourhood health centre in long crendon , buckinghamshire , as part of the 10 - year health plan for england . this government aim to establish a neighbourhood health centre in every community by 2035 . we are starting in areas of greatest need where healthy life expectancy is lowest , including rural towns and communities with higher deprivation levels . planning work has already begun . the hon . gentleman will know that i updated colleagues yesterday in a “ dear colleague ” letter around integrated care boards and local authorities being invited to apply to participate in the national neighbourhood health implementation programme . i am grateful to the minister for that answer . he will have heard me put the case for long crendon many times over many years , and given the proposals for neighbourhood health centres in the 10 - year plan , long crendon offers a very quick win . the community has the land , the planning permission and a gp practice willing to serve there ; it just does not have the funds for the bricks and mortar to build it . can i ask the minister to meet me and the members of long crendon parish council who are leading on this , so that the government can get a quick win on neighbourhood health centres ? the hon . member is clearly a doughty campaigner — i am sure that will mean something good will happen for him in the reshuffle that we are all watching with bated breath . i am happy to have that discussion with him . as i said , the neighbourhood health process will be driven primarily by identifying areas where healthy life expectancy is lowest and deprivation is highest . clearly , he makes a case for his area , and i would be happy to have that discussion with him . the question is on long crendon , so we will see how josh fenton - glynn does . before i start , i pay tribute to the shadow secretary of state , one of the key shifts we need to see in the 10 - year plan is from hospital to the community . key to keeping people out of hospital is tackling the dental deserts , with dental problems being the biggest cause of children aged five to nine going to a&e. will the minister assure me that the new neighbourhood health centres will include dentistry — order . that is not linked to the question . that is why i was really bothered when i called the hon . gentleman . what recent estimate his department has made of the proportion of mental health research funding allocated to eating disorders . through the national institute for health and care research , the department is committed to finding new ways of tackling eating disorders through research . we are supporting research projects , including the eating disorders genetics initiative — one of the largest studies of its kind — and have a £ 4.25 million collaboration with other uk research funders to build new partnerships in eating disorder research . we are also strengthening support for people with eating disorders by recruiting more mental health workers , expanding mental health support in schools and embedding it in young futures hubs . eating disorders cost the uk an estimated £ 9 billion each year , yet research into these serious conditions receives just 1 % of all mental health research funding . that is despite eating disorders affecting around 9 % of people with mental health conditions , the consequences of which are delayed diagnosis and treatment and often lengthy hospital admissions . will the minister agree to meet me and the eating disorder charity beat to discuss how the government can break this cycle and ensure that eating disorder research receives the attention and investment that it urgently needs ? i know that this subject is close to my hon . friend ’s heart , and i pay tribute to him for his work on it . we recognise the devastating impact that an eating disorder can have , and the earlier the treatment is provided , the greater the chance of recovery . the department continues to work closely with nhs england , which is now refreshing guidance on children and young people ’s eating disorders . i commend the work of beat , and i would be happy to discuss this further with my hon . friend . the eating disorder issue is escalating , as the minister rightly points out . will he agree to hold discussions and consultations with the devolved structures in northern ireland , scotland and wales , so this issue goes to the top of the list of issues that have not really been dealt with in the past but need dealing with now ? we remain in close contact with all our colleagues in all the devolved administrations . i will certainly be following up with officials as we develop the research programmes that we are working on , and as we integrate eating disorders into the broader work we are doing around mental health . getting 8,500 more mental health workers and creating young futures hubs and mental health crisis centres is just some of the work that this government are doing on this important issue . what assessment his department has made of the adequacy of urgent eyecare in east yorkshire . the right hon . member ’s constituents can access urgent eyecare services from hull university teaching hospitals nhs trust 24 hours a day , seven days a week and from a range of high - street optical practices locally . integrated care boards are responsible for commissioning primary and secondary eyecare services to meet local need . as part of our 10 - year plan , we are keen to explore how we can make best use of our primary eyecare workforce as we consider shifting more healthcare into the community . would it were so . my constituent scott young , a 34 - year - old father - to - be from beverley , was left permanently blind in one eye after nhs failures , including a two - month delay to urgent surgery following a diabetic haemorrhage , which the trust now blames on admin mistakes . when the same issue threatened his remaining sight , identical delays occurred until i intervened . yet the hull university teaching hospitals nhs trust response contained factual errors , including claiming that a heart condition delayed surgery even though it had not been diagnosed when the delay occurred . does the minister agree that such failings demand accountability , and what steps can he take to improve the administrative processes within our hospitals ? i am very sorry to hear of scott ’s experience . what the right hon . gentleman has outlined is clearly unacceptable . i will absolutely follow up on that issue with officials and report back to him . we can not allow that sort of poor performance to exist , and those responsible must be held to account . what steps his department is taking to improve electronic patient record systems in the nhs . my hon . friend will know that trusts have responsibility for securing — using the approved procurement framework — an appropriate electronic patient record system that delivers all the core capabilities set out in the digital capabilities framework . since 2022 , £ 1.9 billion has been invested in digital transformation , including in the roll - out of eprs to nhs trusts that do not have one and in support to optimise existing ones . the minister will be aware that my hon . friend i commend my hon . friend , and our hon . friend blocked beds cost pembury hospital £ 18,000 every night , yet discharge teams have to manually phone care homes to place people there . my constituent debbie has created a dashboard — it is basically like skyscanner — to accelerate discharges by matching discharged patients to care beds . it has already received seed funding of £ 200,000 from kent county council , and could save up to £ 7 million a year in pembury alone . will the minister meet me and debbie to discuss that idea ? the hon . gentleman highlights the serious problem of staff operating in an analogue age in the nhs , which we keenly highlighted in the 10 - year plan . we want to move the system into a more digital age . we would be very happy to hear more about the scheme that he outlines and the great work that staff are doing to get over some of the problems that they are working with . my constituent lee armstrong contacted 111 when he was suffering from an addisonian crisis . lee and his partner provided full details about his condition to 111 , and when his condition worsened , they called 999 , but what neither lee nor his partner knew was that the electronic record details given to 111 would not be available to 999 , and neither would his patient records . as a result , the ambulance was not dispatched with the urgency required and lee died . will the minister set out how the improvements in the digitisation of electronic records will cover the integration of the 111 and 999 services so that lives like lee ’s can be saved ? my hon . friend outlines a horrific case in her constituency , where she has been a fantastic campaigner since last year . information sharing between 111 and 999 already exists in many places . we want standards in place to ensure that that happens safely across the country . that is a key part of what we are trying to do in our 10 - year plan by bringing together single patient records and records within systems . i am very happy to follow up with her in more detail on the case she mentions , if that would be helpful . many gps say that their buildings are not fit for purpose and lack digital infrastructure . without fully integrated electronic patient records and better systems , including the electronic prescription service across all hospitals and community trusts , we risk wasting time and money while increasing pressure on frontline staff . will the minister outline the steps being taken to full integrate the electronic prescription service across all settings in dorset ? the hon . member highlights the importance of getting this right not only from hospital to discharge but , crucially , in primary care , where 90 % of patient contacts happen across the system . that is why a central plank of our 10 - year plan has been moving the entire system from the analogue to the digital age . we have allocated £ 10 billion , particularly in this spending review , to address this issue and make sure we get this right for the system and for patients . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of the 10 - year health plan for england on the prevention of ill health . the 10 - year health plan sets out how we are transforming our approach to preventing ill health through a set of ambitious measures that make the healthy choice the easy choice . among those measures is our mandatory partnership with food businesses , through which we will make shopping baskets across the country healthier , and our landmark tobacco and vapes bill , to help deliver our ambition for a smoke - free uk by gradually ending the sale of tobacco products across the country . i thank the minister for her response . sickle cell disease disproportionately affects people from african and caribbean backgrounds , yet systematic inequalities persist . a recent nhs race and health observatory report reveals that research funding for cystic fibrosis is 2.5 times higher , despite similar prevalence . will the minister commit to addressing the chronic underfunding and ensure equitable investment in research and workforce specialist training for sickle cell patients across the nhs ? the government are committed to addressing health inequalities experienced by people living with rare conditions such as sickle cell disorder . pioneering research is a cross - cutting theme of the uk rare diseases framework , but we know that there are a small number of rare conditions with a large amount of research , while many more have little or no funded research . i want to confirm for my hon . friend that the national institute for health and care research welcomes funding applications for research into all and any aspects of health or care , including sickle cell disorder . the minister talks about her 10 - year health plan , with “ fit for the future ” splashed across the front cover , but really , it is a plan from “ back to the future ” , with no new ideas that have not been discussed since alan milburn tried to do this in the year 2000 . it will only be successful if the government deliver , but there is no detail in there on how they will deliver . can the minister help us : how will she deliver on the priorities , including preventive ill health ? where can we read the “ how ” , or is it all still fermenting in ministers ’ heads ? we are already delivering . as i have said , the tobacco and vapes bill is making its way through parliament at the moment . we are tackling the obesity crisis through tackling junk food advertising to children . we are working on school food standards , and we are also bringing in rules around planning for junk food establishments near schools . we are supporting people to make healthier choices when it comes to alcohol , and we are tackling air pollution , which particularly affects working - class communities . the list goes on and on , and i would be more than happy to give the hon . member another list if he needs one . urinary tract infections are estimated to impact on the lives of up to 5 million women and girls . in 2023 - 24 , there were over 679,000 hospital admissions , and in 2023 , 4,323 deaths . outdated diagnostic techniques and inadequate treatment for acute utis results in the condition becoming recurrent and chronic . better education of clinical staff and updated guidelines , diagnostics and treatments can help prevent the spiral of ill health that destroys so many women ’s lives . will the secretary of state engage with me and other campaigners to recognise chronic utis as a condition and work to prevent this horrendous , pervasive illness ? i thank my hon . friend for her question and commend the work she has done on this issue and her wonderful contribution to the westminster hall debate that i responded to recently . it is a really important issue and something we are keen to explore further . the secretary of state and i would be delighted to meet with her and other campaigners . the nhs 10 - year plan identifies antimicrobial resistance as “ a critical threat requiring urgent action . ” amr kills 35,000 people in the uk every year and 5 million globally and rising . why on earth are the government covertly axing the fleming fund without telling parliament ? will the secretary of state publish an impact assessment of the effect of the fleming fund ’s closure on our domestic health security ? there is nothing covert about the decisions on the fleming fund . it has been perfectly open and clear that the existing funding has been cut . having said that , the work and partnerships that have been developed on amr continue . the uk continues to be a global leader on this issue , and our ambassador , dame sally , continues to do sterling work on it . i call the shadow minister . last month , the government published their 10 - year plan . it took a year to write , and it contains promises to make even more plans — a cancer plan , a maternity and neonatal plan , a workforce plan and an hiv plan — which we are still waiting for . careful planning is important , but taking too long will delay improvements in care , so when do the government expect to publish those plans and to start delivering ? we are already delivering . the hon . lady is absolutely right to identify that a number of plans are being brought forward . we take this matter very seriously , and we want to ensure that we get it right . we plan : we plan so that we perform effectively , and we plan for success . the national cancer plan will be coming later this year , and i am sure that we will be able to outline a timetable for all other plans . i assure her that planning is not doing nothing ; planning is making sure that we get this right and that we deliver . what steps he is taking to increase metachromatic leukodystrophy screening provision for infants . i thank my hon . friend for raising this issue and congratulate his constituent david kiddie on the 190 - mile walk he completed earlier this year to raise awareness and funds for those with mld and their families . the government are committed to listening to those with mld and their families and acting with compassion and care to support them . the uk national screening committee , which advises the government on all screening matters , is consulting on the outcomes of an evidence review looking at whether to screen for mld . in 2024 , two - year - old lily stock was diagnosed with metachromatic leukodystrophy , a rare and progressive disease that will , in her family ’s words , “ slowly take lily away ” . libmeldy , a lifesaving gene therapy , is available through the nhs , but i understand that it must be administered before symptoms develop . sadly , that means it is too late for lily to benefit from the treatment . emily and sean , lily ’s parents , are campaigning for mld screening to be added to the heel - prick test on newborns , so that mld can be identified early and treated effectively and no family will have to go through this devastating experience . will the minister and her officials look into adding mld screening to the heel - prick test , and will she and the secretary of state join me to meet lily ’s family and hear their story at first hand ? i thank my hon . friend for raising this matter . lily ’s story really lays bare the heartbreak that rare diseases can bring and the vital role that early diagnosis can play . i am happy to meet my hon . friend and lily ’s family . may i suggest that we meet when the uk national screening committee has completed its review , so that the government have received advice on this important matter ? we can then discuss that advice together . in my constituency , there is a little boy called teddy , who was diagnosed with mld — one of the most cruel and degenerative diseases , which is now treatable if diagnosed at birth . teddy was diagnosed too late because there was no screening . he has lost his ability to walk and talk , and he even fights to smile — a battle that no child should ever have to face . the minister knows that the treatment is now available , yet mld has not been added to the simple heel - prick screening tests . will she also agree to meet teddy ’s family when she meets the family mentioned by as the hon . lady points out , for teddy and lily it is sadly too late for that treatment . that is why we are looking at screening . i would be delighted to meet with teddy ’s family once we have the outcome from the screening review . what steps his department is taking to improve car parking provision at nhs hospitals . the department has published guidance that trusts are expected to follow to manage the provision of car - parking spaces for patients , hospital users and staff . responsibility for hospital car parks lies with each individual trust , and provision must be managed alongside the existing policy , providing free parking for those in the greatest need . parking at eastbourne district general hospital , where i was born , is woefully inadequate . the car park is often full , so patients have to park way away up the rodmill hill , and car park services are crumbling . more than that , lower - banded nhs staff now face a near doubling of car parking charges to cover the cost . given that the government have delayed investment in our new hospital and , therefore , in a new car park until the 2040s , what support will they provide in the meantime to upgrade our dgh car parking facilities without our nhs heroes being expected to foot the bill ? as the hon . gentleman knows , the discussions about any advanced works arising from the new hospital programme are ongoing . i am very happy for the department to continue to discuss with the trust how future investment can best meet the needs of the future . university hospital coventry and warwickshire suffers from really poor car parking facilities . i have had to take both my parents there over recent years to use its specialist cardiology services . the poor quality of those car parking facilities causes additional stress for patients visiting those services , which they can ill afford when they have suffered strokes or heart attacks . it is becoming extremely vital that something is done , so will the minister meet me and other local mps to discuss the crisis in car parking at the hospital ? the provision of car parking remains an issue for trusts . i recognise the stress caused by trying to get patients to hospital , particularly if they have mobility problems . i commend the many hospitals across the country that have really good active travel plans and are working with their local communities to resolve some of these issues . we need to hear more from the trust about what provision it is putting in place to serve my hon . friend ’s constituents . what steps his department is taking to tackle health inequalities across the country . what steps his department is taking to tackle health inequalities across the country . the driving force behind this government ’s approach to health is the principle that whoever a person is and whatever their background , they should receive the same world - class services as everyone else , based on need and not the ability to pay . that is why at its core , our 10 - year plan for health looks to stamp out health inequalities , freeing up billions to move critical resources such as medicines and equipment to the regions and patients that need them most . only a labour government will protect the nhs as a service free at the point of use , rebuild it , and make it fit for the future for everyone in our country . i call perran moon . meur ras , mr speaker . carn to coast runs gp surgeries across my camborne , redruth and hayle constituency , including the surgery where my father practised for over 30 years . it is struggling under intense pressure , with deep - rooted health inequalities linked to the surrounding areas of deprivation . while i welcome the review of the carr - hill formula as part of the 10 - year health plan , will the secretary of state come to cornwall and visit a carn to coast health centre with me , to see the innovative work that is already being undertaken and to discuss how the reforms will support health outcomes in the most deprived areas ? i can certainly give my hon . friend that commitment . the damage that was wreaked by the previous government , not just across our health service but across every other part of government , means that the gap between the health of the poorest parts of our country and that of the wealthiest has widened enormously . we have seen real challenges in general practice , which is why there are 300 more patients per gp in the poorest communities compared with the richest , and that particularly affects rural and coastal communities with higher levels of deprivation . we are going to carry out a review of the carr - hill formula . that formula has to work for general practice , and i would be delighted to come and see the work that the team at carn to coast are doing . in kensington and bayswater , there is now a staggering 19 - year gap in life expectancy between men living in notting dale and those living in holland park — which are just hundreds of metres apart — and that gap has grown in recent years . the minister knows that this is a whole - of - society issue to do with housing , employment and education , but can he outline what steps the department are taking to help inner - city areas with very high levels of health inequality , such as that experienced by my constituents in kensington ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for pointing out those stark differences in healthy life expectancy within a single inner london borough that contains some of the richest people on earth , as well as some of the poorest in our country . as for what we are doing as a government , in addition to making sure that funding follows need and that we are tackling deprivation , our approach to neighbourhood health should make sure that we are working proactively in those communities that have the highest level of need , including pockets of deprivation within areas of higher affluence . of course , as our plan recognises and as our mission - driven approach addresses , there are so many social determinants of ill health , including poverty , a lack of good work , damp housing , dirty air , and an inability to access culture and leisure opportunities that are affordable for everyone , not just the privileged few . those are the issues that this government are addressing , consistent with the labour values that got us elected . for residents of new court place care home in borehamwood , wheelchairs are their lifeline . however , they are being badly let down by ajm healthcare , their nhs wheelchair provider , with multiple unresolved assessments , bad communications and waiting times for repairs and replacements unbelievably extending to four years . residents with physical and intellectual disabilities feel let down , overlooked and traumatised . in tackling health inequalities , can i urge the secretary of state to look urgently at this provider and come to the aid of people who desperately need our help ? i can certainly give the right hon . gentleman the assurance that my department will look into the provider that he raises . one reason i was proud that this government increased the disabled facilities grant is that it means not just more ramps , handrails and accessible kitchens and bathrooms , but dignity , independence , freedom and quality of life . that is precisely what the right hon . gentleman ’s constituents are being deprived of if they do not have wheelchairs that meet their needs . i would be delighted to look into this , and i am extremely angry that the failures he raises require me to do so . does the secretary of state agree that public health is at the heart of addressing the long list of inequalities he has just highlighted ? i am deeply concerned that a major reorganisation of local government and the cutting of budgets to the integrated care board will undermine the co - ordination that currently exists in oxfordshire to deliver public health . can the secretary of state assure me and my constituents that public health will continue to be a priority at the heart of the prevention strategy , and that funding for public health will rise in future years to make that possible ? i can certainly give the hon . gentleman reassurance that the work we are doing to streamline and rationalise the amount of money we are spending on nhs bureaucracy means that we will free up resources that can be spent on the frontline , improving patient care and public health . thanks to the decisions taken by my department , the deputy prime minister and , of course , my right hon . friend the chancellor of the exchequer , investment in public health is rising and the spending power of local authorities is improving . that is all good news for public health . i call the shadow minister . tackling health inequalities requires a strong workforce . i recently met a constituent who is about to qualify as a nurse , but she has been unable to find work . she is not alone ; this is a widespread problem . the reasons she has been given include recruitment freezes to save money and nurses brought in from overseas instead . we need more nurses to tackle health inequalities , so will the secretary of state ensure that trusts are funded to support and employ new nurses , and to prioritise british nurses for british jobs ? i can certainly assure the shadow minister that the chief nursing officer and i are working proactively to deal with nursing unemployment . we are also working with the leadership of the nhs to make sure that we are reducing our reliance on overseas workers . grateful though i am to all the healthcare workers who come from overseas to work in our health and care services — the service would fall over tomorrow if they all left , so we should be extremely grateful — there is certainly an overreliance , and that is what we are addressing . i have to say to the shadow minister , though , that both those issues are a result of appalling workforce planning , for which the previous government bear a huge amount of responsibility . what steps his department is taking to support neighbourhood health services . it is only with proper investment and reform that we will bring care closer to people ’s homes and into the community . our 10 - year health plan will roll out a neighbourhood health service in every community , as one - stop shops for health and care services that meet the needs of local populations , including rural and coastal communities like my hon . friend ’s constituency . the previous government failed to move care into the community . we have already hit the ground running on delivering the 10 - year health plan , and launched the national neighbourhood health implementation programme on my constituents in barrow and furness very much welcome the government ’s move towards delivering more neighbourhood health services , but my right hon . friend will be aware of the great concern locally about the proposal from lancashire and south cumbria integrated care board to permanently end level 3 critical care at furness general hospital . more than 10,000 people have signed my petition just this week to oppose that move . will the secretary of state please ensure that decision makers meet me and representatives locally to explore an alternative path forward that ensures patient safety , protects the integrity of our hospital and reflects the area ’s growing population ? that was just one of many instances in which my hon . friend has made the voices and views of people across barrow and furness heard loudly and clearly in this place and across government . in response to her question , i say yes , absolutely : on such an important matter her local commissioners should be meeting her , as the local member of parliament , and i think i can commit to that on their behalf . while such decisions must be made locally and clinically led , they must also be made in partnership with the local authority and the local community . we must ensure that we are engaging democratically elected representatives , and i will ensure that my hon . friend secures that meeting . my constituents in cranleigh have no train service and no direct bus service to the royal surrey county hospital in guildford , which is a big issue for older residents who do not drive . does the secretary of state agree that some of the empty rooms in cranleigh village hospital could provide a very good opportunity for the expansion of neighbourhood health services , and if he has not been briefed on this pressing issue by his officials , may i brief him , or one of his ministers , on it in the autumn ? that sounds like another bid for a neighbourhood health centre in the right hon . gentleman ’s constituency , but i am sure that local commissioners will be delighted to hear the case he has made , given the experience that he brings to bear . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of industrial action on nhs services . before this government came to office , strikes were crippling the nhs . costs ran to £ 1.7 billion in just one year , and patients saw 1.5 million appointments rescheduled . strikes this week are not inevitable , and i sincerely hope that the british medical association will postpone this action in order to continue the constructive talks that my team and i have had with its representatives in recent days . our priority is to keep patients safe regardless , and we will do everything we can to mitigate the impact on them and the disruption that will follow should these totally unnecessary and avoidable strikes go ahead . in a previous role , i found that health workers took industrial action only in extreme circumstances , so i agree with the secretary of state that if the strikes can be prevented , they should be . during previous resident doctors ’ strikes , elective or scheduled procedures were usually postponed , or planned to be postponed , to free up senior doctors to cover their work , but i note that the chief executive of nhs england has instructed hospitals to continue those procedures . has the secretary of state made any assessment of the impact that would have not just on patients but on the staff who would have to remain ? the approach we are taking is different from that taken during previous periods of strike action . nhs leaders have made it clear to me that those earlier strikes caused much wider harm than had previously been realised . there is no reason why planned care — appointments relating to cancer , for example , as well as other conditions — should be treated as being less important than , or playing second fiddle to , other nhs services . that is why the chief executive of nhs england has written to nhs leaders asking them to keep routine operations going to the fullest extent possible , as well as continuing priority treatments . it will be for local leaders to determine what is possible given staffing levels , which is why it is so important for resident doctors to engage with their employers about their determination — or not — to turn up at work this week , and why i must again spell out the serious consequences for patients should these avoidable and unnecessary strikes go ahead . healthcare assistants at blackpool teaching hospitals nhs foundation trust have been underpaid on the wrong band for years , but the trust has consistently failed to put that right , and as a result staff have been left with no choice but to be balloted for strike action by unison from today . healthcare assistants play a vital role in our nhs , but is it any wonder that they often feel undervalued and demoralised when they are not paid the correct rate for the duties that they undertake ? does the secretary of state agree that blackpool ’s healthcare assistants are worth just as much as those in the rest of the north - west and that the trust should pay up now ? i should declare that i am a member of unison . the issue that my hon . friend raises is a serious one . we obviously do not want to see strike action impacting on her local constituents , and my department will do everything we can to help bring an end to the dispute . i will make a more general point : these sorts of choices and trade - offs about resources are precisely why the bma resident doctors , having received a 28.9 % pay rise from this government in the last year , ought to remember the responsibility that i and they have to some of their lower - paid colleagues . resources are finite , and it is important that i act in the interests of all nhs staff and have particular concern for those who work extremely hard but are not properly rewarded . i call the shadow secretary of state . the resident doctors ’ strike is unnecessary , irresponsible and wrong . recently , and again today from the dispatch box , the secretary of state has been resolute in not giving in to the bma resident doctors committee ’s demands . although i do not know the details of the current status of his discussions with the committee , may i encourage him to remain firm in his stance and , while being fair to doctors , to always ensure that he puts the interests of patients and taxpayers first ? once again , the house is speaking with one voice , and i hope that the bma understands the strength of feeling on both sides of the house about the unnecessary and irresponsible nature of the proposed strike action this week . discussions in recent days have been constructive , and i hope that gives grounds for the postponement of strike action so that we can work together to avert it — not just this week , but altogether . if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . under this government , waiting lists have fallen by more than a quarter of a million in our first year , but strike action puts that hard - won progress at risk . if strikes do go ahead , we will do everything we can to minimise the disruption to patients , who will bear the brunt of cancellations . we continue to work with the bma resident doctors committee in the hope that its members will do the right thing and call off the strikes . none the less , if they go ahead , we stand ready , responsive and resolute . there were 5,448 drug - related deaths in 2023 — the highest figure ever — and an 84 % increase from the number that led the previous government to publish their drugs strategy , which was supposed to save lives . does the secretary of state agree that the existing drugs strategy is not fit for purpose , and will he urgently start work on replacing it with a public health - led drugs strategy to tackle this public health emergency ? i am extremely grateful to my hon . friend for his question . the number of drug - related deaths remains far too high , and we are committed to saving lives through access to high - quality treatment . for 2025 - 26 , my department is providing £ 310 million in addition to the public health grant to deliver the recommendations from dame carol black ’s independent review , but there is much more to do . we look forward to working with my hon . friend to achieve success . i call the shadow secretary of state . dementia is one of the greatest health challenges that we as a society face today and in the future , but too many people with dementia end up in hospital , rather than being treated in more appropriate community settings . the 10 - year nhs plan offers a real opportunity to shift care into the community and away from acute settings , including for dementia . will the secretary of state commit to working with dementia uk , the alzheimer ’s society and other fantastic charities as he develops the implementation of his 10 - year nhs plan to ensure that it truly delivers for people with dementia and those who care for them ? i absolutely agree with what the shadow secretary of state has said . all three shifts — from hospital to community , from analogue to digital , and from sickness to prevention — ought to benefit people with alzheimer ’s , dementias and other neurological conditions , as will the pioneering science that we need in this country , which i know he is so passionate about . maintaining the focus on local communities , the fantastic st mary ’s birth centre in melton mowbray , in my constituency , has recently been temporarily closed by the local nhs trust for six months due to staff shortages . although i appreciate that the secretary of state does not have powers over such temporary closures and that local nhs leaders have engaged constructively , many local people fear that “ temporary ” could risk becoming permanent . if that risk looks like becoming a reality by the end of the summer , will the secretary of state or one of his ministers pre - emptively agree to meet me at that point to discuss it ? mr speaker , if i may briefly crave your indulgence at what is my last dispatch box appearance for the foreseeable future , may i take the opportunity — after seven years , almost continuously , on the front bench in government and in opposition — to thank you , to say that it has been a privilege , and to tell the secretary of state that it has been a pleasure to shadow him ? i think he knows it , but i genuinely wish him well . i absolutely give the right hon . gentleman the assurance that i would be happy to meet him about his constituency issue , or indeed anything else . for all of the exchanges that we have across these dispatch boxes on issues of disagreement , what is not always readily understood beyond this house is the extent to which those on both sides work extremely constructively together , on the enormous number of issues that we have in common , in pursuit of the national interest . the virtues of wisdom , kindness and selfless dedication to public service are not the preserve of one side of the house . the right hon . gentleman has those qualities in abundance , and we wish him very well , personally and professionally . uk doctors and nurses have been volunteering their time in gaza . there are shocking reports this morning that israel ’s ground offensive in central gaza has compromised the efforts of the world health organisation after its facilities came under attack . in the light of that extremely concerning news , does the secretary of state agree that those supporting the health response in gaza , including uk doctors , nurses and volunteers , must never be targeted , and that israel must comply with its obligations under international humanitarian law ? i deplore israel ’s attacks on healthcare workers , as well as those on innocent civilians trying to access healthcare or vital aid . these actions go well beyond legitimate self - defence and undermine the prospects for peace . i will be in touch with the world health organisation to offer my support following the intolerable incident yesterday . i sincerely hope that the international community can come together , as my right hon . friend the foreign secretary has been driving for , to ensure that we see an end to this war , but also the recognition of the state of palestine while there is still a state of palestine left to recognise . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . carers across the country have launched a protest from home today , with the carers trust . their faces are projected on screens around parliament square because they are unable to leave their loved ones to protest in person . the government ’s pledge for the carer ’s allowance review to report by early summer looks set to be broken . can the secretary of state today commit to ending the cliff edge for carer ’s allowance and to introducing a statutory guarantee for respite care so that carers know that he is listening ? i thank the hon . member for her question , and for making everyone aware of the powerful protest taking place today , which so visibly reminds us that lots of people ’s voices may not be heard if they can not participate in person . it is a reminder of the challenges that people face . i will undertake to raise her concerns with my right hon . friend the work and pensions secretary , and i give carers across the country the assurance that we are working as fast as we can . having delivered the biggest expansion of carer ’s allowance since the 1970s , we want to ensure we deliver for this extremely important group of people , whom we are lucky to have in our society . my constituency of stoke - on - trent central has some of the deepest ingrained health inequalities anywhere in the country . my constituents are just as deserving of first - class healthcare as anyone else , so can the secretary of state set out how the 10 - year health plan will help reduce those health inequalities and ensure that , across stoke - on - trent and north staffordshire , my constituents have the healthy lives they should expect ? i can absolutely give my hon . friend that reassurance . it was appalling that the previous government not only cancelled lots of the deprivation - linked funding put in place by the labour government but threw all that progress into reverse . that is not the approach that this government will take . we will have funding based on need , not pork barrel politics . i can assure my hon . friend that his constituents in stoke - on - trent will benefit from our sincere commitment to tackling health inequalities . to take the health secretary back to his promise to provide regional healthcare , the integrated care board is opening a consultation on the future of the hospital in goole , after a decade of almost positively running it down . will he instruct all the health services in the country to make the most of the valuable assets they have , not shut them down or misuse them , and actually deliver a local service for local people ? i can certainly give the right hon . gentleman the assurance that we are looking right across nhs estates to make sure we are making best use of them , particularly in the context of neighbourhood health . i have heard the case he has made about how neighbourhood health services could be provided on that site . i hope commissioners have heard the case , but if not i will make sure that they do and that he gets the relevant meetings he needs . my adhd — attention deficit hyperactivity disorder — diagnosis in may this year helped to answer questions about my life and to put support in place to improve it , but we know that over 300,000 children are waiting for an assessment and that untreated adhd affects educational attainment , employment prospects and health outcomes . will the secretary of state set out the department ’s plans to improve access to assessments and treatment for adhd ? will he work across government to develop a long - term , joined - up approach to adhd care ? i commend my hon . friend for bringing his personal experience to bear on this important matter . nhs england ’s independent adhd taskforce is looking at how to provide support for people with adhd and how to improve it . we are considering the taskforce ’s interim report and look forward to the final report later this year . the taskforce is joined up with expert groups established across government to provide advice on meeting the needs of neurodivergent children and young people in education , and on boosting neurodiversity inclusion at work . will the minister confirm what steps the department will take to build neighbourhood health services in partnership with charities , such as macmillan , that have a proven track record of designing and delivering community - based services for people with long - term conditions ? how can we ensure that this is a uk - wide service , and not a postcode lottery for cancer services ? the cancer plan will reflect the three shifts in the 10 - year plan , including from hospital to community . macmillan , cancer research uk and cancer52 all sit on the steering board for the cancer plan , and i meet them regularly . last week , we announced the diagnostic connect partnership with the third sector , linking patients with third sector services on diagnosis . the cancer plan will cover this for the whole of england and build on the commitments in the 10 - year plan . the most recent figures for the three nhs cancer waiting time targets for diagnosis , referral and treatment showed that those targets were missed . longer waiting times can have a serious adverse effect on cancer patients , so can the minister confirm whether those targets will be given a high priority in the national cancer plan when it is published ? the national cancer plan for england will have patients at its heart and will cover the entirety of the cancer pathway , from referral and diagnosis to treatment and aftercare , as well as prevention and innovation . it will seek to improve every aspect of cancer care , including establishing targets for delivery right through the cancer pathway . will the minister give an update on the progress being made to introduce nationwide screening and improved treatments for prostate cancer ? we are looking very carefully at the arguments for national screening . the hon . member will be aware that there are concerns . we have to look at this very carefully to ensure that screening programmes do not cause unnecessary harm , but targeted and widespread screening for prostate cancer is something that the department is looking at and will report on in due course . thank you , mr speaker . i am so delighted to have two questions on health this week that i am not even going to mention ferries ! as my hon . friend will know , the process for securing an education , health and care plan is complex and can lead to delays in accessing vital support . that can have a serious impact on the health and wellbeing of young people and children . what steps is the minister taking to improve the health element of ehcps for families navigating the process , including those in my constituency ? we have inherited a system that is utterly failing to meet the needs of children with special educational needs . this government are reforming the send system , ensuring that there is joined - up support across education and healthcare . we are also supporting inclusive environments and earlier intervention for children through the early language support for every child programme , or elsec , and the partnership for inclusion of neurodiversity in schools programme , or pins . eight years ago , weybridge community hospital burned down . after a long journey , the replacement finally received planning consent last week ; all it needs now is for the secretary of state to sign the cheque on the dotted line . will he do so as soon as possible ? the business case for the rebuild of the health centre has been submitted to nhs england for review , and nhs property services will in parallel be asked to approve the capital funding . subject to those approvals , a new health centre will be fully completed in 2027 . phlebotomists across the country play a vital role in our nhs . will the minister consider making the job role band 3 across the nation to ensure that everybody is paid fairly ? phlebotomists are paid on an “ agenda for change ” pay scale , which is underpinned by the job evaluation scheme . it is something the secretary of state and i discussed with the trade union unison last week ; i should declare that i am a member of unison . it is working closely with the trust in question , but i am happy to discuss the matter with my hon . friend further . many carers have told me how much they rely on respite care to protect their own physical and mental health so that they can continue to care for their loved ones day in , day out . the wonderful chesil lodge day centre in winchester has recently been threatened with closure , and i have been fighting alongside constituents to keep it open . how will the department ensure that respite services such as those at chesil lodge are consistently available and are not subject to a postcode lottery ? can i also — order . i call the minister . our 10 - year plan will boost support for family carers via digital tools such as my carer and include them in care planning and shared decision - making processes . we have raised the carer ’s allowance earnings limit to £ 196 a week — the biggest increase since 1976 — and we have launched the independent commission into adult social care , which will look at unpaid carers ’ needs . the hon . member raises an important point about respite care ; i am chairing a cross - ministerial group on our carers strategy , and i would be happy to update him outside the chamber . last autumn , there was not a single nhs dental practice in derbyshire dales accepting new adult patients other than those referred for specialist care . the lack of nhs dentistry has led many of my constituents to experience severe economic hardship , with one telling me he had to spend £ 100 to have a single tooth fixed and another spending £ 2,000 on dentures . will the government provide increased funding for nhs dentistry to ensure that more people in rural areas like derbyshire dales can access nhs dentists ? the mess we inherited from the previous government beggars belief , with 14 million adults with an unmet dental need , while for children between five and nine years old , the most common reason for hospital admission was to have their rotten teeth removed . this government are determined to get nhs dentistry back on its feet . we are targeting the areas most in need , including rural areas , by delivering 700,000 additional urgent dental appointments , and reforming the dental contract . our consultation is under way , and i encourage my hon . friend to participate . i was really disappointed that there was not one mention of eating disorders in the nhs 10 - year plan , which is particularly troubling given that some of the proposed measures to reduce obesity may inadvertently harm those affected by eating disorders . when will the government finally commit to an eating disorder strategy , as recommended by the eating disorders all - party parliamentary group ? this government are investing an extra £ 688 million this year to improve access to mental health services . we are transforming our mental health services with 24/7 neighbourhood health centres ; i was very pleased last week to visit the centre we are launching in bethnal green . i would gently say to the hon . lady that she is part of the political party that propped up the tories in government — this lot opposite — which led to some of the desperate situations we see across mental health today . parkrun is a global public health phenomenon . will the minister meet me and the new parkrun chief executive to talk about future collaboration ? parkrun is a fantastic organisation that is doing amazing work . we know that movement saves the nhs around £ 10.5 billion a year , but 12 million adults are still inactive , and we need a team effort to succeed in getting millions more moving . there is a lot we can learn from parkrun , and i would happily consider any invitation to meet it . the house has already heard the recent announcement about the closure of the urgent care centre at mount vernon hospital . my hon . friends the members for ruislip , northwood and pinner ( david simmonds ) and for beaconsfield ( joy morrissey ) and i are all concerned about the quality of healthcare for our constituents , especially as the labour government have delayed the new watford general hospital until at least 2032 . what steps is the minister taking to improve the quality of healthcare in our areas , instead of just making it worse ? when this labour government came to office , we promised 2 million more appointments , but we have actually delivered 4.5 million . we have cut nhs waiting lists month after month , and they are now at their lowest level in two years . of course there is more to do . i regret that we had to delay watford general hospital ; the previous government left a plan that was not credible and had no available funding . we are cleaning up their mess , and the hon . member has a cheek to complain about it . the report , “ barriers for adults with cerebral palsy on achieving full life participation ” , published by the former all - party parliamentary group on cerebral palsy , highlighted the cliff - edge in support for those with cerebral palsy when they transition at the age of 18 and the need to end the separation of neuro and musculoskeletal knowledge within the nhs , given that cerebral palsy is a neuromusculoskeletal condition , and that those living with it need easy and ready access to both areas . i would therefore be grateful if i could understand — order . let me help the hon . gentleman . if you have a main question and i call you in topicals , you really need to shorten your question in order to let other members in . nhs england has worked with key stakeholders to develop a framework to aid integrated care systems to commission high - quality services for children and young people with cerebral palsy , including as they transition to adult services . guidance from the national institute for health and care excellence on cerebral palsy in the under-25s also sets out key considerations in transition planning . data published last week shows that despite the government ’s initial action , the proportion of dentists working in the nhs in norfolk and waveney continues to drop . i am pleased to hear about the government ’s work on the dental contract , but the public accounts committee is clear that this will work only if it is backed by sustainable funding . i will give the minister another chance to answer the question : will the government ensure that the extra funding that has been put into the department is actually reflected in extra funding for nhs dentistry ? one thing that i made clear to officials when i came into this post was that every penny that is allocated to nhs dentistry must be spent on nhs dentistry . we are in a crazy situation where demand for nhs dentistry is going through the roof , yet we have had underspends . that needs to stop . we will focus the spending on where it is most needed , including areas that are under - served , such as the hon . gentleman ’s constituency . my constituents marie brewis and denise coates are bravely using their own experience of breast cancer treatment to campaign for a dedicated cancer support centre in luton . does the minister agree that luton could benefit from the wraparound care of a cancer support centre locally , and will she meet me to discuss this ? the national cancer plan , which will be introduced towards the end of this year , will cover cancer facilities across england . i would be more than happy to meet my hon . friend to discuss the particulars in her constituency . brierley park medical centre applied for funding from the primary care utilisation and modernisation fund earlier this year . it has been successful , but it has not yet had the money , and the money must be spent by the end of the year . will the secretary of state please tell my medical centre when it will receive this vital funding ? the hon . gentleman is absolutely right about the timeliness of decision making and the need to release funding when it is allocated . i shall make sure that my department looks into that , and write to him with an answer . i commend my right hon . friend for his work on reducing waiting lists , but at the homerton in hackney , because of a system - wide funding failure , deficit reduction money was removed three months into a 12 - month agreement , which reduced the opportunity to drive down waiting lists still further . will he or one of his colleagues meet me to discuss this issue and see what we can do to drive down those waiting lists ? we are taking action to deal with the over - running of budgets and the reckless spending across the nhs and to bring deficits under control , but i would be delighted to meet my hon . friend . spelthorne residents emma and john lost holly to cancer in october last year . they set up the charity holly ’s heroes in her name . before she died , holly was given a wheelchair by the nhs , and emma and john can not now give it back to the nhs for love nor money . i have raised this with the chief executive of the trust , but can the secretary of state reassure me that this practice is not replicated nationwide ? we absolutely need to look at reducing waste in the nhs , so i would be delighted to pick up that case . can i also say an enormous thank you to holly ’s family for the work they are doing in such unimaginable circumstances ? i really admire people who put themselves forward to serve others in that way after such a painful experience . last friday i brought together gps , housing developers , the local authority , the icb , and anyone else you care to name , to try finally to solve the issue of our having one of the most under - doctored areas in the country for primary care . among the many issues raised was a particularly niche one : thanks to nhs property services demanding a late payment from a couple of gp surgeries , which were unaware that they were due to pay this rent , those surgeries now face the possibility of having to pay a bill that equates to the cost of one gp ’s salary for a year . that can not be right . i would be delighted to look at the issue that my hon . friend raises . i am only sorry that i missed the party last week . lancashire and south cumbria integrated care board is having to make savings of £ 142 million this year , and the backdrop to that is a loss of wards at barrow , lancaster and kendal . we hear a lot about additional money for the nhs . why is none of it coming to cumbria ? it is not the case that none of the money is going to cumbria . we are taking action to deal with the persistent overrunning and over - spending of nhs budgets , which was an intolerable situation that we had to get a grip on . we are investing £ 26 billion more in the nhs , and that will rise over the course of this parliament . we will make sure that every part of the country gets its fair share , not least through the deprivation - linked funding that i mentioned . i know that it is bumpy for icbs as we get them back to balance , but believe me it will be worth it in the end when we have a sustainable nhs that is fit for the future . in 2020 , a consultation was carried out to give prescribing rights to operating department practitioners , but despite positive discussions with the department we are no further forwards and opds and allied health professionals are being held back . does the secretary of state agree that expanding their roles within scope of practice will improve efficiency , patient care and professional development ? we are keen to address these sorts of issues through our workforce planning and to ensure that staff are working to the top of their licensing capability , always within the training provided . that way we can get the best possible value for taxpayer money and , most importantly of all , the best outcomes for patients . does the secretary of state agree with me about the importance of step - down provision , provided by community hospitals such as petersfield and alton , both for patient care and for relieving pressure on acute hospitals , such as queen alexandra and basingstoke ? yes , and that is why we are reforming the better care fund . key to the shift to prevention is making sure that people can stay in their own homes or get home from hospital . the health and social care committee found that such provision costs the nhs £ 1.9 billion every year . can the secretary of state update me on what we are doing to get the social care system working ? thanks to the decision that the chancellor has taken , spending power in social care is rising — not just through department funding but in the spending power of local authorities . my hon . friend is absolutely right : we have to get the right care in the right place at the right time . that often means better care for patients and better value for taxpayers . at midnight , the times published an article on the me final delivery plan , carrying quotes from three me campaign groups . the charity action for me published a five - page briefing at the same time , and “ bbc breakfast ” also featured the plan , so they had all read the plan . i checked with the relevant officers and went to the house of commons library about half an hour ago , and no plan has been published . more than 12 hours after the department ’s press release , no mp can access the plan . is this how it should be ? i thank the hon . member for raising this issue . that is not what i was expecting . a written ministerial statement has been tabled , and i will speak to officials and make sure that that plan is available as it should be . ( urgent question ): to ask the secretary of state for energy security and net zero if he will make a statement on the closure of the prax lindsey oil refinery . in my oral statement on i visited workers at the site on furthermore , we understand that the official receiver continues to explore various proposals for assets on the site . i therefore remain hopeful that a solution will be found that creates future employment opportunities at the immingham site . the refinery will continue to process crude for the rest of the month , and the official receiver will continue selling refined products for a number of weeks , giving buyers time to adjust their supply chains . the former owners left the refinery in an untenable position and gave the government little time to act . that is why the energy secretary immediately demanded an investigation into their conduct and the circumstances surrounding the insolvency , and why i have repeatedly called on the owners to do the right thing and provide financial support to the workforce at this difficult time . i call the shadow minister . when the prax lindsey refinery closes its doors in october , there will be only four oil refineries remaining in the united kingdom , following the news about grangemouth a few months ago . this is the second oil refinery to close in the united kingdom in only six months , prompting serious questions about our energy security and resilience . in immingham , people are waking up today to the reality that redundancies are now inevitable . it is estimated that about 625 jobs will be lost . for the community in lincolnshire , that is seismic . as the minister said , we are aware of the long - standing financial issues with prax group , and i reiterate my support for the government ’s investigation into its directors . what progress has been made on that investigation ? when does he expect the report to be made ? we can not escape the fundamental crisis facing our manufacturing sector . as jim ratcliffe has said , the sector is “ facing extinction ” because of “ enormously high energy prices and crippling carbon tax bills . ” the minister ’s department knows that to be true and has exempted some industry from paying the net zero levies , recusing specific businesses from paying the extortionate green subsidy costs . that is a ridiculous situation that sees subsidies being paid by the government to businesses to exempt them from the charges being imposed by that very same government — we are truly through the looking glass . the department is wilfully talking down the oil and gas industry with hostile language and an impossible fiscal regime while overseeing the deindustrialisation of the united kingdom through the perpetuated high cost of industrial energy . this is not simply managed decline ; it is accelerated decline driven by ideology and steered from whitehall . will the minister tell us what work is being done to ensure the future of the four remaining oil refineries in the united kingdom ? what , if any , assessment has been made of the uk ’s resilience , given the steep reduction in our refining capacity over the past six months ? what , if any , assessment has been made of the increased reliance on imports that will be necessary as a result of the reduction in british refining capacity ? will he please change course and start speaking up for our oil industry — upstream and downstream — which sees from the current government a disregard for it , its workers and the communities that rely most on it ? i agree with the shadow minister , who was right to point out the impact that news like this will have on the workforce , who are hearing it this week , as well as the wider impact it has on their families and the community . that is why it is so important that we provide that support . on the investigation , there is not much that i can update the house on at the moment . the insolvency service is carrying out that investigation , and it would be wrong for ministers to interfere in that , but we have obviously given the direction that we expect it to be completed as quickly as possible . given the mess we found the company in , i would not be surprised if it takes a bit of time for the investigation to get to grips with what was going on there , but that is for the insolvency service to resolve . on resilience and fuel supplies , we have been really clear throughout that we have done everything we can to try to find a buyer to keep the site operating as a going concern , which is important for the workforce as well as for local resilience , but prax lindsey oil refinery comprises about 10 % of our remaining refinery capacity ; phillips 66 — a much larger refinery — is immediately next door . in the past few weeks , we have already seen fuel supplies adjusted and commercial contracts renegotiated . although we clearly wanted the refinery to stay open , our assessment suggests that there is not an immediate risk to fuel supplies locally or in the wider area , but we will continue to monitor that . on the shadow minister ’s wider points , i will first repeat what i have said on a number of occasions : we do support the oil and gas industry . i have spent a lot of time with the industry understanding some of its challenges , which are long standing , particularly around jobs lost over the past decade , and we consulted widely on what the future of energy in the north - east should look like to give confidence to the industry . we inherited the fiscal regime from the previous government . we have consulted quickly on what the future of the energy profits levy should look like to ensure certainty about the fiscal landscape . the treasury will respond to that consultation in due course . we want to give certainty , but we also want to recognise that this is an industry in transition , and burying our heads in the sand and pretending that that is not the case does nothing to protect the workforce in the long term . we will therefore continue to invest in the new industries of the future and in that wider strategy . refineries are important to our economy and will continue to be important . that is why i brought all of industry together in a roundtable to discuss the challenges facing the refinery sector . i was shocked to discover that that was the first time there had been such an invitation from the government in 13 years . i ask the shadow minister to reflect on who was in power for 14 years . i call the chair of the energy security and net zero committee . the minister is absolutely right — so was the shadow minister — to focus on the jobs and the communities affected by the worrying news coming from lindsey . he was also right to say that the problems are the result of shockingly bad management . my select committee will look at the future of refining in this country in a one - off session in the autumn , and we will be able to take further evidence at that point . in response to what the shadow minister said about energy prices , will the minister confirm that the way to get industrial energy prices down — just as with domestic energy prices — is to reduce our reliance on the volatility , uncertainty and high prices that are determined by vladimir putin and the petrostates , and that we have to manage the transition , not shut our eyes to it or somehow play into culture wars as reform wants us to do ? my hon . friend is right . separate from all the wider issues facing the refinery sector and the oil and gas sector generally , it is right we recognise that this week there are workers hearing some devastating news . detailed work will be going on into how much of the site we can utilise in the future , and assessments are under way about how credible some of the bids are . we will do more work on that , and i am sure that his inquiry will be useful . on energy costs more generally , one of the conversations i had when i met the refinery sector was about how we could do more to bring down its costs . we are looking at how we could support refineries more through including them in the energy intensive industries compensation scheme , which would obviously cut costs and help uk refineries with their competitiveness . that is not straightforward , but we are determined to look at that . on my hon . friend ’s final point , he is right that the overall context of what we are doing as a government is driving forward the transition to clean power , because it gives us back our energy security and takes away the volatility in prices that has been so devastating to households and businesses over the past few years . it is also the economic opportunity that helps drive forward refineries into what could be profitable businesses in that transition . they will continue to play a part in that , and we will support them to do so . we have a lot of business today , so if we could help each other , that would be very useful . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . the closure of prax lindsey oil refinery is deeply troubling , with up to 1,000 jobs at risk across the supply chain . it is a devastating blow to workers , their families and the communities that rely on the refinery . we need a clear strategy to support those whose livelihood is in jeopardy . that means practical help with reskilling and retraining . this is also an opportunity for targeted green investment in industries that can offer decent , secure jobs for the future . this crisis speaks to a wider failure . the uk still lacks a proper plan for a just transition that gives oil and gas workers real confidence about what comes next . we need to wind down fossil fuels in a way that provides genuine opportunities — well - paid green jobs , clean energy infrastructure , and proper support for the communities that have long powered this country . as other parties embrace climate denialism and internet conspiracy theories , the liberal democrats call on the government to ensure that we do not backtrack on our climate targets , undermine green investor confidence , and abandon our leadership on the world stage when it comes to climate change . first , what steps are the government taking to ensure that contingency plans are in place , so that those whose jobs are at risk are guaranteed support and opportunities to redeploy their skills ? secondly , how are the government ensuring that investment in skills and regeneration is targeted , so that it has the greatest impact where it is needed most ? finally , what steps are the government taking to ensure that the transition to renewable energy makes the best use of the skills and experience of oil and gas workers in the places affected , such as the humber estuary ? i wrote down the hon . gentleman ’s points , and then he came on to specific questions , but i will respond to the points . he rightly says that this has been devastating news for the workers . he also said something that i want to echo , and which i said to the workers when i met them last week : this decision , and what has happened to the company , is no reflection at all on the incredible , very skilled work that they are doing . i want to reiterate that . so often in these cases , the workers bear the brunt of decisions taken by the company , and that is a great shame . he is right , and we will support the workers . my department is funding the training guarantee to make sure that all those workers are given an assessment of their training needs and future employment desires , so they can be given tailored support . we will make sure that is rolled out in the coming months . on the hon . gentleman ’s wider point about the transition , he is right to say that we need a proper plan . that is why we consulted on the future of energy in the north sea , both through a series of questions , and through a much broader question about what the future of our energy sector looks like . it will have oil and gas for many decades to come , but already thousands of jobs are being created in other offshore industries , and we want to support that . the hon . gentleman is right to highlight that investor confidence is critical . it is shameful that people would seek to damage investor confidence in this country in the name of net zero rhetoric . the truth is that there has been more than £ 40 billion of investment in clean energies in this country . that means jobs and opportunities in all our communities across the country , and those who would talk that down should be ashamed . i draw the house ’s attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests in respect of the gmb trade union . the minister said that he was engaging with workers . will he set out in more detail what engagement he is undertaking with the trade unions that are those workers ’ representatives ? will he give the house an assurance that the detailed modelling work undertaken by the department includes the impact on the wider supply chain ? i also declare that i am a member of the gmb trade union ; that is recorded in my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i have engaged with both the unite trade union reps who are on the site , and with day shift workers who are not represented by a trade union , to make sure that i hear from them . i met them earlier this month and last week at the refinery , and i will meet them in about an hour ’s time to talk through this more . we want to continue that engagement with them . i call the father of the house . obviously , my first concern is my constituents who work in the refinery in the neighbouring constituency , that of my hon . friend on redundancy , because of how the company went into insolvency , the workers will be entitled to statutory redundancy . that is not acceptable , given the role that they played in delivering for the company for many years . that is why i have publicly asked the owners of the company to put their hands in their pocket and improve the redundancy package . it is not possible for the government to improve the package directly , but i am still hopeful that the company owners will do the right thing . we are providing a training guarantee to the workers , from government funds , to make sure that they have that enhanced support . i am happy to take away the point about heating oil . we have been assessing the situation over the past few weeks , including a number of weeks during which fuel has not left the refinery at its normal pace , to see what the impact is on supplies across the region . that impact has been minimal . that is partly because a significant amount of fuel and products come from the refinery next door . however , we will continue to monitor that , and if there is an impact on prices , i am happy to look into that . much like the ceramics sector , the refinery sector is an energy - intensive industry that is at the mercy of industrial energy prices , which are beyond its control but have a huge impact on its viability . it is welcome that the minister thinks that the energy - intensive certification programme could expand to include the refinery sector , but he will know that the business level test is a huge barrier that needs to be overcome ; it means that many companies will not be eligible for the programme . he will also know that the british industry competitiveness scheme is not due to come online for another two years ; indeed , consultation on that scheme has yet to be opened . refineries and ceramics companies are looking down the barrel of ever - increasing industrial energy bills . will he give them some indication of what help and support is available now , before the new schemes come online , so that we do not have more statements about closed factories in the next few months ? my hon . friend is right , and it is deeply frustrating that we inherited many of these issues , which were unresolved for such a long time . these are not problems that arrived in the past 12 months . bringing in the refinery sector for talks with government about the challenges would have been a fairly obvious thing to do at least once in the past 13 years . clearly , that did not occur to the previous government , and we have inherited challenges . my hon . friend is right to say that consultations will take time , unfortunately . it is right that we conduct a proper consultation to make sure that there are not any unintended consequences . the minister for industry , who is a minister in both the department for energy security and net zero and the department for business and trade , is looking at how we can do that as quickly as possible . i am happy to follow that up with her . my hon . friend is also right that nobody wants to be talking about redundancies in any part of our economy , and we are doing everything we can to bring down prices to prevent redundancies . this is a massive blow to my brigg and immingham constituency — most particularly to those directly employed by the refinery , but also to the wider economy of the sub - region . will the minister reconsider what he just said about statutory redundancy ? i want the maximum support given to those workers . i will raise two other points . first , north lincolnshire council published a green growth zone document last year about the future of the regional economy . as we discussed yesterday , i urge the minister to consider an urgent meeting , at which all involved are brought in for a roundtable discussion . secondly , if he is not doing so already , may i urge him to speak to his colleagues who are local government ministers ? north lincolnshire council will lose £ 2.6 million in business rates . needless to say , that is a massive blow that would affect the delivery of services . i thank the hon . gentleman for his questions , and for meeting me to discuss the matter yesterday . i appreciate the impact that the closure will have , not just on those refinery workers who are directly impacted , but on the wider economy . we absolutely appreciate that there are ripple effects from a closure like this . on the statutory redundancy point , we have looked at this , and have pushed to see if there is more action that the government can take to change or give additional payments . it is not possible for government to do that , not least because the insolvency service has to follow specific rules on creditors and how they operate in the event of an insolvency . however , the owners of the company have profited from this business , and they should do the right thing by the workforce that delivered that for them . i have agreed to hold a roundtable discussion , and i previously met the two council leaders to talk about this . i am happy to arrange that discussion , and to have it with whoever is useful and wants to participate , because the hon . gentleman is right about the opportunities . i am happy to engage on the point about north lincolnshire and business rates . although the refinery will not continue to be a going concern , we are assessing bids from those who are interested in the site ; we hope those bids will deliver jobs and economic benefit , and that business rates income will come from new industries on the site . that is not as good as retaining the refinery in its current form , but we hope we can make some progress . i thank the minister for his statement , and particularly for the news that there will be a thorough investigation . i have two quick questions . first , are the reports correct that the previous government did not meet representatives of the sector for 13 years ? i know the minister said that he had met them recently . secondly , families will be in crisis when they hear this news , and they will struggle to deal with it . does he agree that the owner , who i understand is not short of money , has an absolute moral obligation to ensure that those families are supported ? statutory payments are welcome , but the moral obligation has to be made clear . i thank my hon . friend for both those points . my understanding from the sector and from the department is that a meeting has not happened in the past 13 years . [ interruption . ] if on my hon . friend ’s final point , i agree that there is a moral obligation here . having met the workers on the site , i know that they have done nothing wrong . they have worked hard over many years to keep the refinery going , and to deliver a profit . those who have taken money out of that business should now do the right thing and fund those workers , and i hope that they will respond to my letter in due course . with the grangemouth refinery in scotland having closed , and prax lindsey facing the same fate , there is clearly a missing element in the uk government ’s just transition policy . there can be no just transition if skilled jobs are lost when that transition is made . what assurance can the minister give that the government have taken a wider view , in order to stem these closures and address what is clearly a deeper issue with policy ? i take the hon . gentleman ’s point about the importance of recognising that the most important thing to get right is the transition of workers . i have said that in other answers . that requires us to recognise that a transition is under way , and to put in place a plan , which has not happened in the past decade , during which we lost more than 70,000 workers in this industry . it is really important that we grapple with those issues , and it will not be easy . the starting point is to bring together everyone with an interest in this , as i have done — everyone from the trade unions and industry to those making the green investment that is driving this forward — to make sure that we deliver on jobs , and to make sure that training and support are in place , so that workers can transition . he raises an important point . on the hon . gentleman ’s point about grangemouth , it was not breaking news that grangemouth was in a precarious position , and the previous government could have done more to ensure a just transition there . i met the investment taskforce yesterday , along with my colleague gillian martin , the energy minister in the scottish government , to look at the prospects for the sites . there are some interesting propositions coming forward ; there are 84 bids in total for £ 200 million from the national wealth fund , and i hope that we will have good news on jobs and investment in grangemouth soon . i thank the minister for his briefing yesterday , but there is a pattern developing , is there not ? some 800 jobs were created every single day in the 14 years of the conservative government , but unemployment has gone up every single day under this labour government . some 400 - plus jobs have been lost at vivergo , on the north side of the humber , and perhaps 600 jobs will be lost directly , and others lost indirectly , on the south side of the humber . can the minister reassure those affected that this government will not destroy our industrial base , and that there is a future for us , because it looks like we are heading in the wrong direction ? i will avoid the wider political points in a week when workers are finding out about job losses , because that is obviously devastating for them . i will just say that the government have published their industrial strategy , and this is the first time the country has had an industrial strategy in a very long time . [ interruption . ] well , let us say a credible industrial strategy , if the last time we discussed prax lindsey , i asked the minister to support my energy jobs bill — a plan for the redeployment and retraining of oil and gas workers that is proactive and industry - wide rather than reactive and crisis by crisis , and that would be paid for by the companies . that is what the workers and the unions want , but the minister said he did not agree with it . he has now said that the government will fund a training guarantee for these refinery workers and is asking this company ’s owners to make voluntary contributions to support workers . that is progress , but will he now turn this into a proactive and industry - wide plan , and please go beyond asking the company nicely to do the right thing and require it ? i think the hon . lady slightly misses the point . the company went into insolvency . the workers are therefore entitled only to statutory redundancy . i do not think that that is acceptable , so i have called — not nicely , but directly — for the owners of that company to do the right thing , put their hands in their pockets and fund proper redundancy for those workers . that is separate from a wider piece of work we are doing around the transition . i think she also misses the point about the importance of delivering investment in oil and gas that is also investment in renewables and in carbon capture , utilisation and storage to deliver the jobs that come next , so that there is a transition for those workers . i have said that i do not support her proposal , and i am happy to say that again because it would do neither of those things . it is essential that we support the oil and gas industry in its current form , but recognise that it is in transition . we still have decades of oil and gas to come in this country , but we are already building up the industry that comes next . that needs investment , and it also needs us to build infrastructure , which many people in her party seem to oppose . while the minister is right to point out that this refinery produces a small amount of the uk ’s refined fuel overall , the site does provide around 50 % of the fuel into warwickshire oil storage , a key site at kingsbury in the west midlands that supplies fuel into the west midlands , which is obviously a very large demand centre . what is the minister ’s assessment of the impact on the supply and demand balance of road fuels in the west midlands as a result of this closure ? i am happy to follow up on anything specific with the hon . gentleman , but i can tell him that i get daily updates on assessments on exactly that point . clearly , the first week of the insolvency saw some disruption to supplies leaving , but our evidence pointed to the fact that those commercial contracts were able to be renegotiated and to adjust to that . we are continuing to monitor to ensure there is no disruption , and there is no assessment at the moment that would suggest any impact at all on fuel security . clearly , we will continue to do that , and if i can follow up on specifics , i will do so . what a pathetic turnout today from the party of the workers : just four labour mps have turned up to speak out on behalf of the prax lindsey workers . what i want to know from the minister is if it is true that a foreign company has already been lined up to asset - strip and decommission this site — yes or no ? first , i think the hon . gentleman is misjudging the mood of this question , which is about workers affected by redundancy . i hear nothing from him on those workers who are hearing the news this week . on his point , we assessed a number of bids for the business as a going concern . none of those bids were credible , which is why the official receivers made the decision to cease refining . some bids are interested in parts of the site for a range of different things , but i am not party to those bids . they are commercially sensitive bids that will be assessed on the basis of how many jobs can be retained and the industrial opportunities on that site , which is what we are driving forward . i would just say to him that spreading nonsense and rumours , either in this house or on social media , does absolutely nothing to support the workers on that site . i have listened closely to the minister ’s answers , and he is rightly highlighting the importance of the jobs and the redundancies , but i think we need to be a bit clearer and more open with people about what the new jobs in the renewables sector that the minister refers to are about . these jobs are not comparable to a lot of the ones that will be lost in the oil and gas sector . a lot of them are not full - time jobs ; a lot of them are part time or temporary jobs during construction phases . we are losing a huge number of workers across the country , and we will continue to do so because of the government ’s policies on oil and gas and the speed at which the sector is being demolished . can the minister please outline directly to these workers across the country , whether at prax or in the north - east , how their jobs will be supported into the future ? i am talking about comparable full - time jobs , not just the temporary ones . a key objective of this government is to deliver good , well - paid trade - unionised jobs , and we have been driving that forward . my right hon . friend the secretary of state has been pushing on trade union recognition , partly to ensure that terms and conditions in the clean energy industry are as good as those in , for example , the oil and gas industry . we will continue to push on that , and we have already had some successes . i gently say that the investment going into clean energy that is delivering thousands of jobs and will deliver tens of thousands of new jobs across the country comes against a backdrop of opposition from the conservatives on great british energy in the north - east of scotland delivering those jobs . we are also announcing today the final investment decision on sizewell c—10,000 jobs are being created in nuclear after years of dither and delay by the hon . member ’s party . we are getting on with doing this , and we will do everything we can to ensure those jobs are comparable on terms and conditions and pay . i say to her that if she wants these jobs to be created , she should support some of the policies that will deliver them in the first place . i thank the minister for his answers . bearing in mind that the refinery was responsible for supplying some 10 % of british fuel — fuel for the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland — it is absolutely essential that a way forward is found , and found quickly . part of that solution must be a common - sense approach to using fossil fuels . what discussions has the minister had with his cabinet colleagues to provide a long - term assurance that there is a future for this refinery , even at this eleventh hour , so it can be sold as a going concern , as it should ? the government have pushed , over the past four weeks we have been aware of this issue , to try to find a route whereby the refinery can continue as a going concern . that was obviously our no . 1 objective . the official receiver assessed the bids that were made and found that none were viable to deliver that . the government are not going to nationalise this refinery — we are not in the business of nationalising loss - making businesses — so , unfortunately , that is not a route we will take . but we have done everything we can , and what we now want to do is assess the bids for the future of the site to see what the maximalist approach is that , crucially , will keep as many jobs on the site as possible , but also will deliver on the industrial opportunities of that site for the wider community . we will continue to have those conversations . ( urgent question ): to ask the secretary of state for housing , communities and local government if she will make a statement on the government ’s response to the birmingham bin strikes . members will be aware of the continuing disruption caused by industrial action in birmingham . i want to be clear that birmingham city council is an independent employer and that this dispute is between the council and unite the trade union . the government are rightly not a party to it , but of course we have an interest in it , recognising the impact on local residents . this government ’s priority remains birmingham residents , and we will continue to support the council to keep birmingham ’s streets clear while the dispute remains ongoing . thousands of tons of waste have been removed , and routine collections have been restored . the council continues to monitor the situation closely to ensure that waste does not build up again . the background to the dispute is the historical equal pay issues the council has faced , which have been the source of one of the largest equal pay crises in modern uk history , and that has to be front of mind . the council has been in negotiation for many months , making a fair and reasonable offer to unite and being clear about the need to protect its equal pay position . the union rejected the council ’s offer . the council has worked hard to offer options to affected workers , including a transfer into other roles in the council on the same grade and , in some cases , to upskill those workers in scope . an enhanced voluntary redundancy package is also available for those who wish to leave the service , and there has already been significant uptake . given the union ’s rejection of the offer , as of last week , the council is now entering a period of consultation to resolve the dispute while protecting its equal pay position . i urge the union to work with the council on a sustainable way forward that is fair to workers in the council and to the residents of birmingham . finally , hon . members may be aware that earlier today max caller announced that he is retiring as lead commissioner in birmingham , and i wish him well for the future . tony mcardle obe has today been appointed by the secretary of state as the new lead commissioner , and he will take up his position tomorrow . tony brings a huge wealth of expertise , and i am confident that he will continue to deliver on the recovery plan to secure improvements for birmingham ’s residents . the bin strikes in birmingham have now dragged on for over four months , and birmingham ’s 1.1 million residents are paying the price . the government have repeatedly scapegoated bin workers , yet they refuse to address the root cause and real reason why residents have seen their public services crumble and their council tax bills rise by 21 % . at the heart of this crisis lies 13 years of mismanagement and incompetence under a labour - run council . the minister wants to blame the equal pay settlement for cuts , but conveniently forgets that the council has had this settlement looming for over a decade . over 13 years , there has been endless council waste : an athlete ’s village that housed not a single athlete sold off at a loss of £ 320 million , £ 216 million spent on an it system that failed , and £ 53 million spent on consultants . now the government stand idly by while their own council cuts up to £ 8,000 from bin workers . this government should be defending frontline workers , not their own incompetent council . the biggest betrayal is the government ’s deliberate downplaying of their involvement . for months , ministers claimed that this was a local issue , yet it is now clear that government - appointed commissioners must approve any deal . just last week , the commissioners rejected a deal that could have ended the strike , despite the council ’s managing director being inclined to accept it . the misery in birmingham has been prolonged not by the workers , but by the commissioners and therefore the government . this government have the power to end the strike , and yet they have actively dragged their heels in reaching a deal . that raises serious questions about the government ’s commitment to workers ’ rights . the council ’s action amounts to fire and rehire . with the government ’s role in these negotiations , we must ask : are they complicit in aiding and abetting the very practices they are legislating to ban ? finally , will the minister confirm that the government have the power to remove the commissioners who are blocking a deal ? will he personally commit to opposing the fire and rehire practices that the council is using ? i hear the hon . member ’s charac - terisation of the issue , but it bears no relationship at all to the reality of the situation . the council is an independent employer . it is not for the government to go council by council negotiating trade union disputes or terms and condition changes . it is for the councils themselves as the employers to negotiate with their workforces , and that is exactly the same in birmingham as for other councils , as he knows . the commissioners are of course appointed by government and have to act with professional expertise in giving advice to the local authority on whether its plans are affordable and lawful , but the negotiations are taking place between the council itself , and unite the trade union and the council ’s workforce . on this idea that we are scapegoating the workers in this dispute , no party has done more for workers ’ rights than labour . no government have done more on workers ’ rights in a generation than this government , headed by the deputy prime minister . when i hear members of this house talking in a way that degrades that , that is a complete and absolute failure to accept not just the legacy we inherited as a government — that includes , by the way , birmingham city council and its local taxpayers — but our determination to put that right . finally , of course birmingham could and should have made some big financial decisions much earlier . that is a matter of fact , and that is why commissioners are in there today . but the local government finance settlement had an increase in core spending power of 9.8%—that is , £ 131 million of additional money into birmingham . that included the largest settlement through the recovery grant of any council in the country . i call the shadow minister . as i have a series of questions for the minister . what guidance will he give his seven - strong commissioner team to bring about an end to the strikes ? what public health assessment are the government carrying out of the impact of more than 21,000 tonnes of uncollected rubbish and a huge increase in the rat population in birmingham ? will he consider withdrawing the facility time for unite the union , which is currently refusing to go about the process of bringing an end to the strikes ? will he tell his commissioners — including tony mcardle , whose appointment has been announced today — that birmingham ’s besieged households must not be held to ransom by the unions for a day longer ? will he tell the house who he thinks has failed the households of birmingham more ? is it the labour council , in leaving rats on the streets and 21,000 tonnes of uncollected rubbish in a heatwave , or this government , who have failed to intervene to bring an end to this blight on residents ’ lives ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his questions , which i will try to answer in turn . let me say , though , that we will take no lectures at all from the party that was in government for 14 years and saw the downgrading of local authorities across the country , including in birmingham . although these are our commissioners , as the hon . gentleman says — that is correct : they are government appointed — let us not forget which government appointed them . they were appointed on the watch of the previous government . today we are just announcing a change in the lead commissioner . we need to be careful not to politicise those people , who believe in public service and are helping out the local authority and supporting the government in trying to turn that council around . let us leave the politicisation of the commissioners to one side and deal with the facts . last time i was in the chamber , the conservatives were talking down the role of bin workers , as if somehow that work was degrading . at that time , i think they were suggesting that the armed forces might be brought in to collect waste and that that would somehow degrade their role . that was never going to be the case , but it was a glimpse into how the conservatives view the workers who are affected . one thing that is absolutely certain is that the labour party believes in the power of frontline workers and in the importance of these frontline roles . we absolutely value the role of refuse collectors , and we see the implications of waste not being collected . but we have got to be clear , too , that whatever settlement is on the table has to be lawful and affordable , and it can not cross the red line of undermining the equal pay negotiations that are taking place . i hope that we can agree at least on that basis . i call the chair of the housing , communities and local government committee . i thank the minister for outlining the government ’s work to maintain vital collection services for residents , who want to see their city cleaned up rather than another summer of this , given the recent heatwave . strike action has now passed the six - month mark . as the minister just outlined , it is important that we consider the hardship felt by many of the striking workers . many of them do not want to politicise this ; they just want to do the right thing by their families . one recently told the bbc : “ morale ’s quite low … everyone ’s trying to stay strong and together , but it is very difficult . the union has tried to help us out with strike pay , but for a lot of people it does n’t cover their … bills . it puts a massive strain on our family . kids , money — money ’s tight , credit cards are maxed out ” . nobody should be put in that position . i hear the minister ’s calls for the commissioners , birmingham and the unions to resolve this issue , but what more can he and the government do to bring everyone around the table so that we can finally bring an end to the dispute ? i thank the chair of the select committee for her comments — we agree on much . she speaks to why a resolution on this issue is so important . at the heart of this , there are working people with rent and mortgages to pay , who want a resolution . to be clear , the council has been in negotiations over many months and has made a fair and reasonable offer to unite , which , unfortunately , the union rejected . the council has also worked hard to offer options to affected workers , including their transfer to other roles in the council at the same grade , and , in some cases , has agreed to upskill in - scope workers . a generous redundancy package is available for those who wish to leave the service ; we have seen an uptake in that . in the end , none of us wants this to roll on indefinitely ; we want to see a resolution for the affected workers and for the taxpayers of birmingham , who quite rightly expect their local public services to be delivered to a good standard . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . birmingham wants its refuse and recycling service back as quickly as possible to end the risks to public health and the environment , especially in the most densely populated parts of the city . the liberal democrats pay tribute to the volunteers and emergency services , who were out there cleaning up the city by dealing with refuse , waste pile - ups and fly - tipping while the council and unions could not agree and continued clashing hammer and tongs . for years under the previous conservative government , councils were expected to do more and more with less and less , and that has borne fruit in birmingham and many other places . the government must now grasp the nettle and tackle that funding crisis , particularly in social care and local government generally , so that what is happening in birmingham does not spread across the country . given that one - off clean - ups have cost the council £ 3.9 million already , is it not time for the government to fund a complete clean - up of the remaining refuse so that residents do not have to foot the bill and spend the rest of the summer living alongside disgusting rubbish . will any clean - up ensure that waste is properly dealt with and recycled where possible , given that the city is already ranked third from bottom in waste recycling ? the hon . gentleman makes fair observations about the funding crisis in local government , but it would be remiss of me not to take him back to the coalition years , which started austerity in local government . the liberal democrats were not just casual observers of the demise of local government but active participants in it . in those very first years , when the cuts really bit for local authorities , they aided and abetted . our job , after 14 years of the impacts of those decisions , is to find a way through , and we are getting on with that . we are rebuilding the foundations of local government . we have announced a consultation on the fair funding review , which will see a redistribution of funding across the country towards the areas of high deprivation that need it most . we are taking into account all the different service pressures . we are grasping the nettle on the structural changes needed in devolution and reorganisation to ensure that the sector is fit , legal and decent at the end of the process , and we are repairing the broken audit market alongside that . we are getting on with repairing the foundations of local government , but we need to be clear that this is a localised dispute , and of course we do not want to see it impact on local people . i say to the house — because i have heard this a number of times and should have called out the first example — that there are not tens of thousands of tonnes of waste accumulating on the streets of birmingham . that was the case , and it was dealt with efficiently . in most cases , collections are taking place for most households at most times , and there is not the accumulation of the type we saw earlier . clearly , the situation is fragile and we do not want it to return to how it was , which is why we remain in regular contact with the council . i welcome the appointment of the new lead commissioner . as the minister knows , we have had many discussions about the intervention , including at times from a place of concern . i look forward to working constructively with tony mcardle on behalf of the citizens of birmingham . i draw attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests in respect of the gmb and unison unions , which are the claimant unions in the equal pay case in birmingham . i feel compelled to round out the partial account that we have heard today in the chamber . will the minister confirm that by far the largest share of birmingham ’s equal pay liability of more than £ 1 billion was incurred when the conservatives and liberal democrats ran the city , and that over the past decade to 2024 , birmingham suffered the sharpest reduction in spending power of any unitary authority in the country , with devastating consequences for every constituency in birmingham ? that is a fair point . i forgot that as my hon . friend i commend my parliamentary neighbour , the minister will be aware that labour is now imposing the contract , which the conservative opposition leader , councillor bobby alden , urged the labour leadership to do a year ago . does he understand that my constituents in the royal town of sutton coldfield , who come under birmingham for local government purposes , have had their patience tried beyond endurance by this bankrupt labour council ? is he aware that recent polling suggests that only 5 % of birmingham residents are likely to vote labour next may ? my constituents — and , i have no doubt , those of the hon . member for birmingham perry barr — are counting the days until next may comes and we can get rid of this dreadful council . i thank the right hon . member for taking my advice and not making this party political — a bit more refining and we will get there in the end . surely the right hon . member would expect that the local authority would enter a trade union negotiation in good faith and would go as far as it can lawfully go in making a settlement offer that respects the workers who are losing pay as a result of equal pay , because that is surely the right thing to do . i hope he would not expect the council to disregard that entirely . the council rightly cares about its workforce , not least because many of them will be birmingham city residents themselves , and it wants to make sure that it supports that process . the council , like us , was not happy that the offer was rejected by the union , but that is not to say that we can not use this time for the conversation to continue , so that we can reach a resolution that puts the people of birmingham first . could the minister explain this ? i understand the issues of equal pay , and i think equal pay is essential , important and legally necessary , but what we have here is a reduction in pay for a significant group of workers . how can they possibly be held responsible for the financial problems that birmingham city council has ? is their case not entirely justified — that they are protecting their own wages and conditions , as any good trade union would do in any negotiations ? can not he simply accept and understand that , and that be the basis on which a settlement is agreed , so that they can return to work ? the way the right hon . member starts is where i would hope most local authorities do when looking at equal pay , but the reality is that there will always be winners and losers in equal pay where women have been underpaid for a long time . councils have options here : they can either compensate and pay upwards for all the female workers in post to the comparable male worker , which for most councils in most circumstances will not be affordable , because there are huge sums attached to that ; or , to make a package affordable , they have to equalise it out in consultation with the trade unions . that is exactly what has happened in birmingham . the issue in birmingham is very particular to the waste service , where a previous agreement was reached that honestly does not hold when assessed against equal pay in terms of the tasks that are carried out by those workers . in the end , it does not pass the equal pay test , but that is not to say that we are not urging the council and unite the trade union to continue negotiations to resolve this . we absolutely want the right outcome for the workers and the residents of birmingham . i , too , thank my hon . friend our starting point , of course , is that we want all parties to negotiate in good faith , and we want the local authority to do its best to table a deal that goes as far as it can go , but the red line has to be that it can not compromise and completely unravel the equal pay negotiations that have taken place , to which all the trade unions — not just unite — have been a party . therein lies the issue . the hon . member could rightly say — i think this is what he indicates—“surely you just pay what it takes to resolve the issue with the striking bin workers , ” but for the equal pay package to hold , a comparable payment would need to be made to all the female workers in scope , so the numbers he talks about are fantasyland . they are not single - digit millions ; they are tens or hundreds of millions of pounds , which goes above both legality and affordability for the local authority . we have urged the council to negotiate in good faith with the trade union and to go as far as it can go , provided that it is lawful , affordable and does not undermine the equal pay liability so far . i congratulate my hon . friend we have to accept that there are some issues here that are unique to birmingham . for instance , many councils across england dealt with equal pay over a decade ago , and birmingham did not , which is why the liabilities have escalated in the way they have . on the hon . member ’s fundamental point about fair funding and ensuring that local public services can be rebuilt , we can agree . we believe that most people ’s local neighbourhood services have been impacted so heavily by not only austerity but the growth in demand in adult ’s , children ’s and temporary accommodation that we have to completely rethink both how we fund local government and how we reinvest back into prevention and early intervention to prevent that crisis management model . i thank the minister for his answers and wish him well in his endeavours to enable a solution to be found . the government have stated that they are committed to a “ sustainable resolution ” to the severe backlog of uncollected waste and the ongoing pay dispute . the workers state that they face cuts of some £ 8,000 per year , which would be a devastating loss for those with families and responsibilities . will the minister acknowledge that reducing current wages is not the way forward and that the government must intervene now , to make workers feel worthwhile and to sustain trust between the council and the workers ? whoever is negotiating in this environment will have the same guardrails as the local authority does . the local authority has to be mindful of the equal pay package that it has agreed with all the trade unions , and it can not do anything in this very narrow dispute — however impactful it is on the workers and local residents — that means completely unravelling the equal pay package . i share the hon . member ’s concern about the impact , but it is important that the local authority and unite the trade union continue those talks and try to find a resolution . with that being the final question , madam deputy speaker , may i wish you and other members of the house a peaceful recess ? thank you . with permission , madam deputy speaker , i will make a statement regarding this government ’s commitment to establishing the truth about events at orgreave in 1984 . the clashes at orgreave coking plant in 1984 are etched indelibly into our nation ’s memory . the clash marked a pivotal moment in the nationwide miners ’ strike that was ongoing during that period . some 95 picketers were arrested and charged with riot and violent disorder , but all charges were later dropped after evidence was discredited . as a result of the violence , there were serious implications for the relationship between policing and coalfield communities at that time , and the passage of time has not diminished the impact on those present and their families . on thursday last week , the home secretary visited the site of the former orgreave coking plant , along with campaigners from the national union of mineworkers and the orgreave truth and justice campaign , as well as a number of members of this house and the mayor of south yorkshire . i know that the home secretary was very grateful to all those who took the time to attend and that she was moved by the experience they shared and by walking part of the route that picketers walked on that day 41 years ago . it is this labour government ’s commitment to get truth and justice for those coalfield communities . it is important to note that there have been significant changes in the oversight of policing since 1984 and the way in which public order is policed . nevertheless , questions about the specific events at orgreave have remained unanswered for far too long . more than four decades may have passed , but those questions must still be answered . that is why we committed in labour ’s manifesto to ensure , through an investigation or inquiry , that the truth about events at orgreave comes to light . yesterday we made good on that promise , as the home secretary announced the establishment of an inquiry into events surrounding the clashes at the orgreave coking plant in 1984 . the rt rev dr pete wilcox , the bishop of sheffield , has agreed to chair the inquiry . the bishop is a very well - respected member of the local and wider regional community in south yorkshire , and his credibility and impartiality will stand him in very good stead to deliver this inquiry . he will be supported by a small panel of independent experts who will be appointed in due course , in a similar vein to the hillsborough panel chaired by the bishop of liverpool in 2010 . the purpose of the inquiry will be to aid public understanding of how the violent clashes and injuries caused at orgreave on it will be key for the inquiry to have access to all information that it deems relevant . for that reason , the home secretary has recently written to all police forces , the national police chiefs ’ council , the college of policing and all government departments to ask that all material they hold relating to the events at orgreave be retained , in order that it can be provided in a timely manner to the inquiry if requested . recognising the need to deliver swiftly while avoiding any undue impact on individuals ’ wellbeing , i hope the inquiry will look to previous examples of good practice , such as the hillsborough independent panel , to inform its method of delivery . the home secretary is in the process of consulting the inquiry chair on proposed terms of reference . she has asked him to engage with key stakeholders , including the national union of mineworkers and the orgreave truth and justice campaign , as part of that process . we will place a final copy of the terms of reference in the libraries of both houses at the earliest opportunity thereafter . it is our expectation that the inquiry will launch in the autumn . for the police to perform their critical functions effectively , it is essential that they can secure and maintain the confidence of the people they serve . that is why this labour government have made rebuilding trust in policing an integral part of our plan for change . of course , much of that effort is concerned with strengthening forces for the challenges of now and the future , but where historical events cast a long shadow that stretches into the present day in our coalfield communities , we must shine a light on what happened and ensure that any and all lessons are learned . questions about events at orgreave have gone unanswered for too long . this government committed to putting that right , and the upcoming inquiry will work independently , fairly and without fear or favour to establish the truth about what happened . i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow minister . i thank the minister for advance sight of her statement . growing up in the north - east , i know the emotions stirred by the miners ’ strike ; decades after the events , they continue to cause significant division and disagreement in our communities . regardless of people ’s views on the rights and wrongs of the incident , historic events such as this , which saw conflict and violence on our streets , will always be deeply regrettable . we must acknowledge that in the decades since , no government — including the last labour government , which had 13 years — deemed it necessary to establish such an inquiry . that labour government included three current home office ministers , with the current minister for border security and asylum , as members will know , there have been previous calls for such an inquiry , but when the decision was made not to grant one , it was based on reasoned grounds . there has been a passage of time , and there have been significant legislative and systematic changes in the decades since . as the home secretary said in her written statement , “ there have been significant changes in the oversight of policing since 1984 , and to the way that public order is now policed ” . does the minister believe that an inquiry is likely to result in any meaningful and relevant lessons for today ’s policing system ? the minister is a long - standing advocate for those impacted by infected blood — a case of truly disgraceful systematic treatment over decades . similarly , the hillsborough panel highlighted the deep injustice of a tragedy involving this police force , but both those inquiries understandably came at considerable cost . will the minister outline what the department anticipates that delivering a proportionate and meaningful inquiry on this issue will cost ? the press reports on the proposed chairman raise serious questions about his ability to act in a politically neutral and independent manner . can the minister assure the house that the inquiry will not be political in nature and that it will listen to the views of all parties present on the day , so that it is not merely an example of the government putting the interests of the unions ahead of the police ? as with so many issues recently , this raises questions about the commitment of the government to supporting brave police officers , who act within the law to do their job . can she confirm that the government are committed to supporting police officers who put themselves in harm ’s way to keep public order and comply with their training and instructions ? finally , i note from the government ’s publication that the inquiry will be statutory , with powers to compel individuals to provide information where necessary . that sounds remarkably similar to a request that we have made to the government , which was repeatedly rejected . the victims and survivors of rape gangs deserve detailed updates on the progress of that inquiry , yet the lack of information about how the new inquiry will be set up and how it will compel evidence leads me to conclude that the government have prioritised the miners over the minors who suffered horrific exploitation at the hands of rape gangs . this labour government ’s union paymasters should not determine the pecking order of justice in this country . there are still perpetrators of child sexual exploitation and those who covered it up who have gone unpunished , yet the government have chosen to prioritise this inquiry . in her audit , baroness casey spoke of the need to implement inquiries that are time limited . i ask the government to focus on this issue and , given their initial refusal to do so , ensure that action is taken at a much greater speed to bring about justice for those young , vulnerable women who suffered at the hands of rape gangs . i was going to start by saying that i welcomed the shadow minister ’s initial comments , in which he recognised how the situation at orgreave all those years ago still casts a shadow over communities in yorkshire , the north - east and other parts of the country . i must say that i was surprised by some of his comments , because i know that he is a good man and is trying his best to fulfil the role of shadow policing minister . i will answer his questions , and will come on to the issue of grooming gangs that he raised in the latter part of his contribution , but i must say that i found his comments extremely distasteful , as well as not accurate or correct . first , i will deal with the question of why we are having this orgreave inquiry . our manifesto committed us to ensuring that there was a thorough investigation or inquiry , so that “ the truth about the events at orgreave comes to light . ” we are delivering on that manifesto commitment today . as i said in my statement , we are also committed to rebuilding public confidence in policing , and campaigners and mining communities have spent decades searching for answers about what happened . the purpose of the inquiry will be to aid the public understanding of how the events at orgreave on the shadow minister asked about the cost . we have been very clear that the home office will meet the cost of the inquiry . we are also mindful that we want the inquiry to be as expeditious as possible , and to be value for money . that is why we have looked at the model of the hillsborough independent inquiry — we think that is a good model to follow . certainly , there will be conversations with the chair about the projected cost and the timeline that he will want to set out . turning to the issue of the chair , again i was really disappointed by the shadow minister ’s remarks about the bishop . bishop pete has previously supported calls for an inquiry . it is important to note that that was in the context of his pastoral role , in which he has supported members of the diocese of sheffield who were impacted by the events at orgreave . he certainly did not show any favour towards either the police or the picketers when calling for that inquiry . i do not think that that call detracts from the necessary credibility , impartiality and independence that i believe bishop pete will bring to his role as chair of the inquiry . he has the backing and support of the key stakeholders in taking that role forward . it is also important to remember that the chair of the inquiry will be supported by a small group of independent members , who will have expert knowledge in certain areas to help the chair fulfil his terms of reference . as the shadow minister said , the inquiry is statutory . that is because we recognise the importance of ensuring that documents can be brought forward . it is important that people can be compelled to produce documents and that witnesses can be compelled as well . finally , the shadow minister referred to the issue of grooming gangs . he will know that a great deal of work has been done to make sure that the hideous , appalling situations that have been uncovered around the grooming gangs will now be dealt with . the safeguarding minister , my hon . friend i very much welcome the policing minister announcing to the house the actions that the government will be taking . i was active at the time of the miners ’ strike , and i now represent 23 former mining villages . many of the men i represent were at orgreave , and if we were to take even a small sample of opinion as to what those men think happened there , they would say that the finger points in one direction only : at no . 10 , and at people closely associated with mrs thatcher . i want to ask about the inquiry ’s terms of reference . on the day , 90 - odd men were arrested on trumped - up charges , with evidence falsified by police officers . i have met some of those police officers , and they say that they had orders from above telling them what to say and what to write . that is a serious matter : men were put on bail , put in prison or even hospitalised , all on trumped - up charges . will the inquiry ’s terms of reference allow the bishop — who is a good man — to pursue the trail of evidence wherever it leads , in order to determine once and for all how that injustice was organised by people in the conservative party ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for his question ; i know that he has a great deal of experience and knowledge in this area . as i said in my statement , the terms of reference are currently being discussed with the chair , but it is very clear that the inquiry should look at the evidence , and should hear testimony if that is what it wishes to do . it will do so without fear or favour , wherever the evidence leads it to look . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . i came into the chamber for this statement to hear and speak about the orgreave inquiry , so it was pretty shocking to hear the shadow minister use it as an opportunity to yet again play politics with child sexual abuse and exploitation . as a survivor myself , i find that particularly appalling . the liberal democrats welcome the announcement of a statutory inquiry into the events that took place between police and miners at orgreave on inquiries can be a powerful tool for uncovering the truth about injustice , but they will only reach their full potential when there is a duty of candour that requires public officials and authorities to co - operate fully . as such , although the government have committed to bringing such a duty of candour into force , will the minister take this opportunity to provide a clear timeline for introducing a hillsborough law to parliament ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for what he has said . to put things in context , the home secretary and i have met a range of key stakeholders already to hear their respective views on the scope and nature of the orgreave inquiry and what it should seek to achieve . there has already been a consultation with the orgreave truth and justice campaign , the national union of mineworkers , south yorkshire police , the mayor of south yorkshire and many members of this house who have an interest in this issue , including my hon . friend we have also met other interested parties in the field of law . one of them whom i met personally was michael mansfield kc . he was the lawyer who represented a number of those who were charged at orgreave . we have also met academics , because we know that there is value in looking at what academics can show us about what works with inquiries . we have therefore already engaged in a lot of consultation . there is further ongoing consultation on the terms of reference , and that is the responsibility of the chair . i expect that all the parties we have met will be engaged again . there is active work being done on the hillsborough law at the moment . i can not give a timeline today , but i know that it will be brought to the house shortly . it is a privilege to be in the chamber today to hear that we are finally getting the inquiry that has long been campaigned for by the orgreave truth and justice campaign , the num and many in my community and across south yorkshire . they are simply asking for the truth . the shadow minister has just said that the inquiry should not be politicised , but does the minister agree that orgreave is political ? it is one of the most political things that has ever happened to south yorkshire , and it is incredibly important that the inquiry is put on a statutory footing so that it can compel people to give evidence and get to the truth of something that many in our communities still bear the scars of . my hon . friend speaks with great knowledge about how orgreave has affected her community so many years on . she makes the important point that there is a political context to this inquiry . those of us who were around then know that it was a very political time , with the miners ’ strike and all that . it is absolutely right that we have this opportunity to look across the piece at what happened at orgreave . as my hon . friend first , i welcome the statement that has been made by the minister today . it is an enormous step forward , and we should pay a huge tribute to the orgreave truth and justice campaign , and in particular kate flannery and chris peace and their colleagues , for all the great work that they have done for a long time . labour pledged to hold an inquiry in its last three manifestos — in 2017 , 2019 and 2024 — so this is a good step forward . will the minister bear in mind carefully what we need to know a number of things . will the terms of reference allow evidence to be taken under oath from wherever it needs to be taken , and from whoever was there ? arthur scargill and many others , and all those surviving miners who were there must be given time to explain exactly what happened . we also need to know the role of south yorkshire police in the attacks that took place against those miners , so that we can get to the truth . i realise that putting a timetable on an inquiry is a slightly difficult thing to do , because we do not want to prevent the inquiry from getting all the evidence it needs , but we also do not want the inquiry to run on forever and lose its impetus and purpose . can the minister therefore give us some idea of roughly how long she expects the inquiry to take to report ? is she prepared to accept interim reports , so that rapid progress can be made ? will the minister assure the house that where the evidence leads to the culpability of ministers , police officers , senior civil servants or many others throughout the command chain for the events that the hon . member for normanton and hemsworth explained , prosecutions will follow , with evidence put before the courts and , if necessary , people brought to justice for it ? we have to bring justice to the totality of this event . i agree with the right hon . gentleman about paying tribute to the orgreave truth and justice campaign . i had the privilege to meet some of the members of that campaign , and i fully acknowledge and appreciate how lives were ruined and families have suffered a lot . not just the people there on the day , but the wider families have suffered . it is absolutely right that we set up this inquiry ; lives have been ruined . i know that the chair will take note of the right hon . gentleman ’s comments about what he would like to see in the terms of reference . as to the timetable , i absolutely agree . i want this inquiry to be conducted as quickly as possible , but as thoroughly as possible . we were looking at a timeframe of around two years , but that was in the early discussions that we had . i obviously can not prejudge the recommendations of the inquiry ; we will need to look at those recommendations when they are made . as chair of the coalfields group of labour mps , and on behalf of the group , i welcome this statement . it is an historic moment , and i know that orgreave truth and justice campaigners and many more labour colleagues would have been present had they had a little more notice . the minister will know that , even last year , organisations such as northumbria police were destroying documents . those actions could hinder this inquiry , and it is vital that individuals and organisations are held accountable , not just for what happened 40 years ago , but for any attempts to undermine justice by destroying evidence . will the minister confirm that the inquiry will have access to all information and evidence , and that no further documents will be destroyed or evidence withheld ? will the inquiry have the power to compel witness testimony ? i hope that this inquiry will not only uncover the truth , but make recommendations to right the wrongs done to many miners , including some of my constituents , who were wrongly convicted under riot and unlawful assembly laws . ray patterson , now sadly no longer with us , is one of those miners . i thank the minister and the government for honouring the manifesto pledge . first , i will deal with this issue around documents . the home secretary recently wrote to all police forces in england and wales and all government departments to remind them of the relevant legislative frameworks for records management and to ask that information relating to the events at orgreave on i thank the minister very much for her statement , and for her carefully chosen words on a contentious issue . i ask her this question gently from experience . does she appreciate that , similar to the prosecution of veterans and service personnel in northern ireland , asking a retired officer why he made a split - second decision 40 years ago , what was happening in detail when he made that decision and the exact wording of directions given to him is and can be incredibly distressing and upsetting ? those officers are now in their 80s or perhaps even their 90s . what support can the minister offer them to enable them to cope with the re - traumatisation that they will undoubtedly suffer ? that is an important point . this is not the first time a minister has had to stand here and agree to an inquiry into events that happened a long time ago . the hon . gentleman and i have worked together on the infected blood inquiry , so he will know that it took a long time to arrive at that point . i fully recognise that the length of time involved means some people , sadly , will have died , while others will be very elderly and having to recall what happened . this is not how we would want it to be , is it ? as for the hon . gentleman ’s point about those who will be called to give testimony to the inquiry , i know that the bishop will be considering what support should be provided to help the witnesses , whether they are police officers or picketers and their families , and i am sure that that will be uppermost in his mind . as one who represents a constituency in the heart of the durham coalfield , i recognise the pressing need for an inquiry into the events that occurred at the orgreave plant on i bitterly regret the fact that it has taken so long for the inquiry to be established . as i have said , there were a number of other causes , but we should have been looking at this far earlier . i think it helpful that members are expressing their views about what should be covered by the terms of reference for the inquiry , because i know that the bishop will want to note what the house and its members have to say and ensure that they form part of his discussions about those terms of reference . it was alleged that amber rudd refused to hold an orgreave inquiry because it would slur the memory of thatcher . can the minister confirm that this inquiry will have a statutory power to compel witnesses to provide evidence , and that politics will not get in the way of uncovering the truth once and for all ? i can absolutely confirm that this is a statutory inquiry , with all the legal powers that a statutory inquiry has to compel the provision of documents and of evidence from witnesses and to go wherever the evidence leads it . as the chair of the all - party parliamentary group for miscarriages of justice and a lifelong trade unionist , i welcome the long overdue announcement of a statutory inquiry into orgreave and pay tribute to all who have campaigned for truth and justice , particularly the orgreave truth and justice campaign . however , given the serious concerns about evidence that has been destroyed , tampered with or withheld , will the minister confirm that any inquiry will be underpinned by a clear legal duty of candour to guarantee full transparency and accountability on the part of all those involved , including the police and former government officials , so that the victims and campaigners receive the full answers that they deserve ? we gave careful consideration to the role played by the hillsborough independent inquiry , because we think it would be very useful for the chair of this inquiry to look at the model that it provides . i take my hon . friend ’s point about the duty of candour , and work is being done on putting that into statute , but the bishop will be looking at all these issues . i remember clearly the miners ’ strike of 1984 and , in particular , what happened at orgreave , and i know that it has many painful memories for a lot of people , so let me first thank and commend the government for holding this statutory public inquiry . it appears that after four decades we will finally secure some truth and justice in relation to what happened on i am grateful to my hon . friend for his comments . it is clear that once the inquiry has been established we must let it do its work and make its recommendations , and we will then seek to respond to those recommendations . i thank the minister for her statement and for launching the inquiry , thus keeping our manifesto promise . in coalfield communities such as mine , many former miners still bear the scars , physical and mental , of what happened at orgreave 41 years ago , and our towns and villages still feel that collective sense of injustice . a great many men want to share their stories of that day , to ensure their own closure but also to ensure that the truth will out . will the minister assure my constituents , and ex - miners up and down the country , that they will have an opportunity to contribute to the inquiry ? i am sure that the bishop will listen carefully to the comments that members have made . i know that some people would feel very comfortable talking about what happened , explaining and giving testimony , while others would not want to do that . it will be for the bishop to decide on the best way forward , to ensure that the inquiry hears from individuals and has access to the documents , and he will be setting out the terms of reference shortly . i strongly welcome the minister ’s statement and the fulfilment of that manifesto commitment and , like others , i pay tribute to the orgreave truth and justice campaign . i am sure that members across the house will have been disturbed by reports of the destruction of potentially relevant documents — a point that has already been ably raised . the home office is currently considering the case for instituting a public inquiry into the 1974 birmingham pub bombings , and i do not expect the minister to pre - empt that today , but in respect of the preservation of records , will the department consider taking the same actions to preserve potentially relevant documents , including those held by external bodies , in advance of that decision ? the northumbria police case highlights the particular risk of accidental loss or deliberate destruction in advance of that legal protection kicking in . i would welcome the chance to discuss this matter further with the minister . i am very happy to discuss this matter with my hon . friend . i think it worth pointing out that police forces are independent of government and that decisions concerning the management of their records are for them to make in accordance with their respective reviews and policies on retention and disposal . the government expect any such decisions to be made in accordance with relevant legislation and national guidance and , as i have said , it is a criminal offence to destroy documents that may be relevant or to conceal information that would interest a public inquiry . and now for something completely different . with permission , madam deputy speaker , i will make a statement about the government ’s progress with industry on the remuneration of artists in the music sector . music is not just the food of love . it does not just set our hearts dancing and express our deepest desires . it does not just showcase the uk to the world . as part of our dynamic creative industries , which we have identified as one of the eight priority growth sectors in our industrial strategy , it is key to our economic future as well . that is why music is at the heart of our new 10 - year creative industries sector plan . our new music growth package will more than double government funding for the industry to £ 10 million annually for the next three years . that will help uk artists to achieve domestic and international success , while nurturing our grassroots music scene . we want the uk music industry to thrive , but we know that it will not unless artists receive their fair share of the rewards , especially in the new era of streaming . the stereotype of artists starving in garrets is not a model for a successful industry . musicians deserve their fair reward , and the industry will only flourish if new generations of musicians are able to make a living , so it is with pleasure that i announce today an important milestone : uk record labels have agreed to new measures that will boost the earnings of legacy artists , songwriters and session musicians . the uk music industry is a global powerhouse . coldplay , adele , stormzy , ed sheeran , dua lipa , raye , bryn terfel , alfie boe , iestyn davies — our country has been the birthplace of genre - defining talent that has shaped the soundtrack of generations , so it is no surprise that we are the third largest music market in the world , and the second largest recorded music exporter . the first music streaming service started in 2001 , and streaming now accounts for a majority of music revenue . this has created a series of challenges for the uk music industry , radically transforming how audiences experience music , how musicians earn a living , how record labels treat their artists , and how artists access different markets . the culture , media and sport committee sought to address some of these issues in an important report on music streaming in 2021 . in response , the competition and markets authority completed a market study into music streaming , and the intellectual property office conducted research on potential copyright reforms . in spring 2024 , three years after the committee ’s report , the then government finally launched the creator remuneration working group , which is tasked with “ exploring and considering industry - led actions on remuneration from music streaming for existing and future music creators ” . the government convened the group once before the general election , and i chaired my first meeting with it within a month of taking office . i am pleased to announce that after six meetings and a series of bilateral discussions — some of them quite difficult — this work has resulted in a set of measures from uk record labels that they estimate will deliver tens of millions of pounds of new investment to support uk artists by 2030 . central to this is a new set of principles that will be adopted by the british phonographic industry and the association of independent music , and recommended to their uk label members . some independent labels are already implementing the principles , and i am delighted to say that the three major labels — universal music group , sony music entertainment and warner music group — will adopt them and introduce bespoke packages to boost the earnings of artists , especially legacy artists who signed up before streaming came on to the scene . in order to address the specific challenges faced by smaller labels , the bpi and the aim are encouraging them to provide targeted support that is appropriate for their size and resources . the principles will commit labels across the uk to providing targeted support for legacy artists , songwriters and session musicians . for legacy artists , this includes disregarding unrecouped advances , bespoke support to increase streaming engagement , and much greater clarity about the process of contract renegotiation . for songwriters , the support includes the payment of per diems for the first time , with major labels warner uk and universal uk committing to a payment of £ 75 per day , in addition to expenses . sony uk will fund a bespoke new songwriter support programme , in partnership with the ivors academy , to provide financial support and assistance to songwriters ; these payments will not be charged as a recoupable cost from their advance . for session musicians , the support includes an increase in session fees , agreed at the end of last year , and a commitment to reviewing their income from broadcast and public performance . the principles announced today will complement the industry code of good practice on transparency , and the industry agreement on metadata , which we published in 2024 . they mark a major milestone in the government ’s work with the music industry in response to the culture , media and sport committee ’s 2021 report on the economics of music streaming . some concerns remain with regard to the deal for session musicians , which is why i will convene a further meeting with industry to discuss those issues . we want these measures to be delivered in full , so that artists see real improvements . the secretary of state and i want legacy artists to see their work revitalised and introduced to new audiences , and to have their unrecouped balances disregarded and their contracts renegotiated . in order to track progress and measure success , we will work closely with members of the creator remuneration working group , including the council of music makers , on implementing a robust monitoring process , through which we can evaluate the extent to which the principles improve earnings , as intended . the government will then assess the need for further intervention to ensure that this package delivers on its objective of bringing about real change for creators . this is neither the end of the road nor the lifting of the needle on the record , but it is a pivotal point . if the principles we have discussed are truly implemented , they have the potential to improve the lives of artists across the uk . i am deeply grateful to the bpi , the major labels and the association of independent music for engaging with this work . i want to recognise the dedication of the council of music makers , which includes the featured artists coalition , the ivors academy , the music managers forum , the music producers guild and the musicians ’ union , for its tireless commitment to its members . finally , my thanks go to the culture , media and sport committee and its predecessor committees for shining a powerful light on this issue . i commend this statement to the house . a love of music is something we all share . all of us have favourite songs that make up the soundtrack to the most meaningful moments in our lives — moments of joy and sorrow . they are songs that live forever . our music industry is a true global success story ; it has global stars like adele , ed sheeran , and my favourite band , oasis , and world - class cultural institutions such as the royal academy of music and the london symphony orchestra . our music industry remains one of our greatest and strongest exports to the world . it not only showcases our talent on the world stage , but contributes £ 8 billion to our economy . it is truly a jewel in the crown of our thriving creative sectors . as the minister has noted , streaming has transformed the music industry , benefiting both listeners and artists . audiences now have access to more music than ever before , and artists can reach listeners on a scale they could only dream of in the past . however , as the minister identifies , there is concern about whether artists receive a fair deal in this delicate ecosystem , and the opposition share that concern . although contracts between artists , labels and streaming platforms are private commercial agreements , i know that members on both sides of the house agree that the success of streaming should not come at the expense of artists ’ livelihoods . in 2022 , the previous conservative government asked the competition and markets authority to conduct a study into the music and streaming services . i was encouraged to learn that the cma found no evidence of publishing revenues being suppressed by distorted or restricted competition , and that the share of streaming revenues going to publishers and songwriters has increased from 8 % in 2008 to 15 % in recent years . however , concerns remain , especially around the use of artificial intelligence across the creative industries . i know that the government have commissioned independent research on the impact on creators , performers and the wider industry of potential changes to copyright law in the areas of equitable remuneration , contract adjustment and rights reversion . furthermore , the centre for data ethics and innovation has completed research on the playlisting algorithms used by streaming services . i can assure the minister that members on both sides of the house want a better deal for artists , songwriters and performers . that is why we broadly welcome the government taking an industry - led approach to this issue . if only they did that elsewhere ! i must , however , press the minister to provide assurances to the house . first , what consequences will there be for labels that fail to comply with the new principles , and what percentage of artists does he believe will benefit from today ’s announcement ? secondly , what message does he have for creatives and publishers who remain deeply concerned that they are not being fairly rewarded for their hard work ? lastly , will the government commit to reviewing these reforms within 18 months , to ensure that they are working for the industry ? incidentally , i see that the former shadow secretary of state is here , it is a great delight to hear from the hon . gentleman asks what happens if people fail to comply . i am absolutely confident that all the labels that we are talking about will want to adopt the principles , because they have been part of the negotiating process . we had to have tough conversations at various points , but they have signed up to the principles and will deliver on them . i am confident that if any legacy artist says to their label , “ i want to renegotiate my contract , ” they will have a chance to renegotiate , although the precise terms of that renegotiation will of course be a matter for the artist and the label . some people who signed a contract before streaming came into existence might have been on a rate of something like 8 % , 9 % , 10 % or 11 % . they will be able to negotiate that up to a digital right more like 20 % , 25 % or 30 % . that will make a significant difference to legacy artists . many people have made the very strong point that it is all very well increasing the number of streams of a legacy artist ’s work , but if they do not get any more money as a result , that will not really benefit either the record label or the legacy artist . i am very confident that this package will deliver . the hon . gentleman asked about having a review in 18 months ’ time . i can do better than that : as i have said , we will review this in 12 months ’ time , because if the package has not delivered , we reserve the right to bring in legislation . i made this point several times . in the eu , there is an equitable renumeration clause in legislation , and if we felt the need for that , we could progress that . however , after our really good discussions with all the parties , i am very confident that all of them want to comply with this package . i will make one other point about songwriters . lots of people know the famous names we all talk about — the hon . gentleman referred to ed sheeran , oasis and so on — but a lot of those who really deliver are the songwriters ; they create the things that rattle around our brains for years and years . making sure that they are not out of pocket was one of the really important principles i wanted to adopt . i am really proud that , for the first time , there will be per diems—£75 a day , plus expenses — to make sure that no songwriter is out of pocket . that is matched with the deal that the ivors academy is doing with sony , for £ 100,000 a year . we have to invest in the songwriters of the future , so that we have the strong music industry we want for the future , but i am not impressed by his fur - coatery . on famous names , i call paul waugh . thank you , madam deputy speaker . first , i declare an interest , in that my son fin is a member of the band big huge new circle , whose latest single “ pearl ” is out on spotify , and is recommended by clash magazine , which calls it “ beautifully complex ” . i welcome today ’s announcement , particularly the introduction of per diems and the session musician uplifts . i thank the former member for cardiff west , who is sitting in the peers ’ gallery , for all his work on this . it is hugely welcome , and perfectly timed for the musicians ’ union delegate conference this week . given the widespread concern about fair pay for streaming , and how long it has been since our select committee first reported on this , can the minister explain what further powers the government hold to intervene if these industry - led measures fall short ? first of all , can i wish — was it big huge new circle ? [ interruption . ] yes , big huge new circle . so we have got it in hansard three times now . i will take my fee later—10 % obviously . or 15 % ; it is 15 % for lots of agents these days . obviously , the future of the music industry in the uk depends on having a pipeline . the single most important thing we can do is make sure that every single child has an opportunity to be a musician at school . creative education in our schools not only delivers by providing musicians , but is a force multiplier for lots of other forms of education . that is something on which i am working very closely with the department for education . i note that lord brennan is up in the gallery — that is another song from music hall , i think . my hon . friend is absolutely right that lord brennan , who was on the select committee , was one of the driving forces making sure that there was not only a first report , but a second report in the last parliament ; he held the government ’s feet to the fire . i am determined to do precisely the same when it comes to the record labels . i honestly believe that we will now have one of the best arrangements in the world for the remuneration of artists from streaming , and i am sure that the record labels will stick with the arrangement . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . britain ’s musicians have long been our most beloved cultural treasures . in the crowded field of excellence in our creative sectors , our musicians are some of our proudest exports . they are part of a £ 124 billion industry that drives our economy , so support for our legacy and session musicians is completely overdue and very welcome . the musicians covered include the devines in berkhamsted , upcoming artists like myles smith , and national treasures like elton john — i agree that adele is one of our national treasures — and , as was mentioned , all those around them : songwriters , producers , and those who support them . technological change means that online streaming now constitutes the vast bulk of music consumption , and 120,000 new tracks a day are uploaded to music platforms . this often leaves a hole in musicians ’ income , so it is absolutely right that the government are taking this issue seriously . we simply need to get this right , so i ask the minister to clarify for the house how much confidence we can really have that the principles he is spelling out will finally lead to a more equitable distribution of streaming revenue . ultimately , this is a label - led , voluntary framework ; where is the independent oversight ? crucially , what guarantees are there of consistency or enforcement across the industry ? we have raised this issue many times in the past , but it remains true that if we are serious about protecting artists ’ right to remuneration , we need to ensure that copyright , which has underpinned success for decades , works in our digitally evolving world . musicians and creatives face an ai tsunami , which could pose a threat to their livelihoods ; we need to tackle it seriously . i conclude by asking the minister once more to consider swifter action from the government on copyright and data mining , in order to support our musicians and creatives , as well as innovation across the uk . i think the hon . member is in danger of becoming a national treasure herself . [ interruption . ] oh , i see that i have not united the house on that , but—[interruption . ] the right hon . member for daventry can not keep heckling ; he is the shadow health secretary now . the important point is that if anybody is not happy with their renegotiation , we have included in the principles a means of appealing . that is obviously a major role of the musicians ’ union , but if by the autumn we suddenly find that lots of musicians are saying , “ excuse me , but i have n’t managed to renegotiate with my label ” , then we will be returning to this issue . the record labels are fully aware of that , but they are determined : each is going to put together a bespoke package to try to revitalise legacy work . they are also looking at wiping off unrecouped balances and making sure people can earn more into the future . the one thing i have always been nervous about it is that i do not think governments should be writing contracts . this is really important . julie andrews , when she took the role of maria in “ the sound of music ” , decided — or this is how the negotiation ended up — that she would just take an up - front free , and she never got paid any royalties thereafter . that was probably a poor decision , or she was not given any other choice . however , i think schwarzenegger , when he made movies , quite often decided to take the royalties and did not take any up - front fees . different artists will enter renegotiation in different ways , but we wanted to rebalance the equation so that it is more in the interests of the musicians , and that is what we have done . i welcome this statement ; it is brilliant . three weeks ago , i had the most fantastic visit to universal music — thanks to charlotte allan for sorting that out . i also spoke to the chief executive , dickon . their support , love and continued passion for bringing in new artists was really transparent and obvious to me , so to hear this arrangement for legacy artists is just wonderful . it was not done in a timely enough manner , but it is wonderful that , just over a year after getting into power , we have effected this change ; i thank the minister for that . i am also very pleased to see in the statement a commitment to having more conversations with session musicians on ensuring that they get the recognition they should be getting . will he give me some idea of the timeframes for those next steps ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for what she said about dickon . he was really very helpful at universal in the process of getting us to this place , particularly on the issue of per diems — the £ 75 a day — which was one of the major asks of the ivors academy , and i am really pleased we were able to do that . she is right that we need to look at session musicians , and of one of the undertakings i have made is that i will be getting the bpi and the musicians ’ union together to discuss that matter again this autumn . i hope that will be in the first couple of weeks of september . given the minister ’s helpful references of a sartorial nature to his opposite number , may i congratulate him on his carefully understated choice of necktie today ? i shall certainly remember to bring my dark glasses next time he is on parade . can he explain to me — as an ardent swiftie myself — what protection performers , such as the son of i am grateful for the comments about my tie . i would say that it is understated compared to some of the other ties i have worn , so i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman for his commendation on my sartorial elegance . but he is wrong about youtube . youtube is one of the streaming services and people are remunerated . one could argue that they should be remunerated more , but if people are breaching copyright , that is an offence and it needs to be pursued . record labels are pretty keen on doing so on behalf of their artists , but , as i say , youtube is one of the streaming outlets . i welcome the minister ’s statement and his work along with the government . we will now be among world leaders in supporting our creative industries , especially on streaming remuneration . will he outline how he will ensure the changes fairly benefit all artists , including legacy performers , session musicians and those outside major labels ? what steps will be taken to enforce industry - wide implementation , especially if voluntary measures fall short ? the argument for doing this is partly because all musicians simply do not earn enough to make a living . that is the truth of the matter . having 12 million streamings might equate to earning a theoretical amount of money , but the musician will not earn that amount because it will be diluted by the various processes it goes through — the money the agent takes and all the rest of it . maybe that is why so many artists have produced songs about poverty — even destiny ’s child , with “ bills , bills , bills ” . it has been an obsession for many artists . there is sometimes the impression that an artist , in music or in any other creative industry , can only be really good if they have struggled a bit , but the truth is that we want people to be able to make a living out of their creative industry . a key part of being a labour government is being able to deliver that . may i invite the minister to congratulate isle of wight band wet leg on reaching the top of the albums chart , a particular achievement given that it has beaten oasis , which i know has personally disappointed my hon . friend yes , i am more wet leg than oasis as well . as co - chair of the all - party parliamentary group on music , i commend the minister on doing an excellent job of bringing record labels into these new provisions . the history of the music industry is sadly full of tales of exploitation , and the industry has proved notable for its intransigence . protecting the dignity of british songwriters by putting money in their pockets is a welcome step , and it is pleasing to see greater transparency over artists ’ renegotiations . however , it is clear that the label provisions , as helpful as they are , do not change or rectify the economic injustice of the streaming model as it stands . as the minister knows , copyright law was not brought up to do date for streaming , never mind for what is approaching with ai . more than half the membership of the musicians ’ union earn less than £ 14,000 a year . i commend the minister for his efforts , but can he also offer members reassurance that this is not job done , when so many music creators and workers are still so poorly served by current arrangements ? what more is he going to do for new and emerging artists in terms of the streaming model ? the one bit we have not been able to address is the amount of money that goes from the streamers themselves directly to the record labels . that is an international settlement , so it is more difficult for us to address . there was a time , when i first arrived in the house , when musicians were getting absolutely nothing and the amount of money going to record labels and musicians fell off a cliff because of pirated music . spotify and other streaming services then came into the equation and managed to rectify some of that , but the situation is far from ideal . i wish more of the money was going directly to the artists . it is my own personal decision that i do not stream music ; i buy music , because i think more of the money goes to the artists that way . but of course , for millions of people in the uk — even for the swiftie over there on the opposition benches , i welcome today ’s announcement , not least because i am the mum of an aspiring composer and performer . i was pleased that the minister mentioned the work of teachers and the department for education in supporting music in schools . credit should go to mr wardrobe from downlands community school in hassocks for putting together the band room 3 , by literally putting them in the practice room , room 3 , when they were at school . they are now doing really well and performing regularly in brighton . how can the minister ensure that the benefits announced today are not just concentrated in london , but benefit all the regions , including sussex ? i commend mr wardrobe , who has made the room where it happens musically . i commend all music teachers . i remember when i was at school , our music teacher decided that the boys ’ choir should sing a song from a musical . unfortunately , it included the lines , “ i do n’t know how to love him … and i ’ve loved so many men before ” and he suddenly decided that we would not be singing it anymore — so music teachers do not always get it right , but sometimes they are courageous . it is really important we ensure that this is about not just london , but the whole uk . that is one reason that it was important that we got the per diems issue sorted . songwriters from across the uk sometimes do have to travel into london for song camps , writing camps or whatever , and making sure they get their expenses plus a per diem is a really important part of ensuring that this does not just apply to some people in our cities . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i really welcome the statement , which provides more support for grassroots music creators . it is also important that grassroots music creators have the grassroots music venues to play in , including the fantastic acoustic couch in bracknell . will minister update the house on the department ’s plans for supporting grassroots music venues across the country ? yes , and i commend acoustic couch . i have not visited , but i am sure an invitation will be on its way very soon . we want to preserve as many of our small music venues as we possibly can . that is why we are pushing as hard as possible the idea of a £ 1 levy on arena tickets . i am delighted that the royal albert hall announced yesterday that it will be first venue across the uk to implement that . i have pushed live nation to step up on this and it said , “ yes , yes , yes , ” but it felt a bit like , “ maybe , maybe , maybe ” , so i am still saying , “ quando , quando , quando ” . i welcome this industry - led approach — that is the right thing to do — but we also need to bear in mind the artists who need remuneration at the end of it . they are not doing it for the money , but they do deserve to be paid . what plans do ministers have for the independent monitoring of the implementation ? i ask that so the minister does not himself have to retain an eye of the tiger at all times . oh dear , the hon . gentleman is worse than me . [ interruption . ] oh yes he is — and it ’s not even panto season yet ! [ interruption . ] he has a very moderate tie , though . it is important that we have proper evaluation . we are in the process of working out precisely how we will do that . i have said to the group that we will convene in a year ’s time . by then , we will have evaluated fully whether this has really worked . i am honestly very confident that it will deliver the goods . the hon . gentleman says that artists are not necessarily doing it for the money . i went to see alison moyet at kew gardens a couple of weeks ago . she was absolutely magnificent . at the beginning of her set , she said , “ i ’m not necessarily going to play what everybody wants me to play , because this is n’t karaoke . i ’m an artist and a musician , not just a celebrity . ” that balance is really important for lots of artists and musicians . they need to earn a living , but they are also artists who have their own conditions and they need to be able to pursue what lies in their heart . i start by—[interruption . ] oh , that is a bright tie , minister . i start by echoing earlier comments thanking the former member for cardiff west , the unions and the ivors academy for their important campaigning on this issue , and i congratulate the minister for getting this important deal over the line . the music industry has long suffered with issues of transparency , and i have no doubt that the minister will want to ensure that these announcements make a real - world difference . will he therefore tell us a little more about the independent scrutiny that will be in place to ensure that these new measures are implemented , and will he say whether there is a means of auditing what benefit music makers will see from these changes ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . we need to ensure that the new measures are implemented . as i say , i do not want to undermine confidence in that , because i do not want to give anybody a get - out clause for not implementing them . we will be working over the next few weeks with both the bpi and the association of independent music on putting together a proper evaluation process over the next year , and i hope i will be making a statement in a year ’s time — although obviously that will not be up to me — on precisely how it has worked out . as i said earlier , i reckon this is worth several tens of millions of pounds of extra investment in the british music industry , and i think we will see that it has delivered . just returning to the issue of my tie , madam deputy speaker : it is a day of the dead tie by van buck . the minister does very well to shake off the abuse about his tie from the swiftie on the opposition benches — it is mainly empty spaces there — calder valley has a thriving creative sector with lots of small and independent artists who have lost out to streaming . today ’s announcement is welcome , of course , but small artists face the twin threat of both ai and streaming . will the minister assure me and the house that he will do more to ensure that those small artists can get the money in their pockets , where it belongs ? the point i made about the remuneration of musicians , and all forms of artists , applies equally to streaming and to ai . the secretaries of state for culture , media and sport and for science , innovation and technology held their first meeting last week with the creative industries and ai companies to discuss how we proceed on the issue of ai and copyright . there is a broadly outlined set of principles , one of which is undoubtedly that those who made the original work must be remunerated when it is used to create some other form of work and some other form of value . i agree with my hon . friend on his point about empty spaces on the opposition benches — empty chairs at empty tables . today ’s news is great , especially for the artists and musicians in my constituency who regularly play at the bootleg , a fantastic venue that we must ensure stays open for future generations to enjoy as my dad and i have enjoyed it . what plans are in place to engage with artists , representatives and the trade unions to ensure that today ’s welcome changes deliver meaningful improvements for artists at all stages of their careers ? it is good to see my hon . friend in his place . i gather that the pier is for sale — indicated assent . i am not sure whether he is intending to buy it himself . of course , many acts have appeared on the pier over the years . my hon . friend makes the point again about the importance of having small venues where people can perform to start and build their career and end up as the kind of household successes that we know . not everybody will earn millions from music , but we do want many more people to be able to make a decent living out of their music in the uk . establishing good terms of trade and having a strong copyright regime is absolutely key to delivering that . the musicians ’ union was a key part of the discussions that we held throughout the last year . for the final question , i call chris vince . thank you , madam deputy speaker . there was some mention of national treasures earlier ; to quote alison moyet , “ only you ” . [ laughter . ] i wo n’t be called last next time . from the newtown neurotics to do n’t worry and the subways , harlow has always had a vibrant music scene . what plans does the minister have to engage with artists at all stages of their careers to ensure that these welcome changes provide meaningful improvement ? well , i am “ all cried out ” that i was not on my hon . friend ’s list of national treasures . he makes a very important point . we need to ensure that these changes apply across the whole of the united kingdom . in her performance at kew , alison moyet also made the point that every child is a musician and an artist until they are persuaded not to be at some point in their life . this is what i really want to embrace in everything that the government do in this area , in relation to the creative industries ; we talk about film and the big , famous successes that we have in the uk , but actually , a lot of it is about real hard graft by people who have had to learn how to perform well , what it is to be in front of an audience , how it is to market their performance and all the rest of it . it is tough , tough , tough . half the time , all those musicians are saying to the record labels is , “ you pay my rent . ” on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . i wonder if i could seek your guidance . it has now been 36 days since the home secretary came to the dispatch box to give a statement on the possibility of a national inquiry into the grooming gangs ; indeed , it has been seven months since the home secretary , back in january , indicated at the dispatch box that there would be five local rape gang inquiries . this is causing a huge amount of concern for many victims and survivors of this heinous crime . yet here we are on the last day before recess without an update from the home secretary at the dispatch box on the timings , who the independent chair will be , the funding arrangements , and , dare i say , whether keighley and the bradford district will be included . i seek your guidance , madam deputy speaker : under standing orders , is there any mechanism for you to ensure that the home secretary comes to the dispatch box before the end of the day to provide an update on the national inquiry into grooming gangs ? i thank the hon . member for notice of his point of order . i have to say that i have received no notice from ministers that they intend to make a further statement on this matter , but ministers on the front bench will have heard his point of order . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . at the start of this month , i submitted a number of parliamentary questions to the department of health and social care on the subject of the independent commission into adult social care . a number of those questions , despite being due for answer on the 7th of this month , remain entirely unanswered as of today , the 22nd of this month . the department has also declined to estimate the number of hours spent on the commission by the department since july 2024 on the grounds that the cost of such an estimation would be too great . i ask your advice , madam deputy speaker , about how i can get those questions answered for the benefit of my constituents , and so that i can fulfil my duty in holding the government to account . i am grateful to the hon . member for giving notice of her point of order . the timeliness and adequacy of answers to written questions are not matters for the chair , but all hon . members are entitled to expect full and helpful answers on time . she might like to raise the matter with the procedure committee , who i know take a close interest in these matters . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . you will know that long ago — indeed , before we were born — tens of thousands of young men were sent to a far off place to witness the first british nuclear tests . ever since , some of us have been campaigning for their interests . earlier this year , the government announced that there will be a review into the blood and urine tests taken at the time of those tests ; you will appreciate the significance of that , madam deputy speaker , because of the risk of radiation poisoning . the government have said that the review will be published , but we have no clarity as to when . there are tens of thousands of these records , which are being examined as we speak . have you had any notice from ministers on when they will come to the house with an interim report ? these men are now elderly ; they are dying , of course , because of their age , by the week and month . however , i , along with i thank the right hon . member for notice of his point of order . i have received no notice from ministers that they intend to make a statement on this matter . he has , however , placed his point on the record . presentation and first reading ( alison bennett , supported by ed davey , helen morgan , dr danny chambers , jess brown - fuller , wendy chamberlain , steve darling , vikki slade , olly glover , gideon amos , bobby dean and cameron thomas , presented a bill to place a duty on the secretary of state to ensure that unpaid carers are offered respite breaks ; to make provision for and about such respite breaks ; to require the secretary of state to publish guidance relating to respite breaks , including guidance about funding ; to make provision about support for unpaid carers ; including support following the discharge of a cared - for person from a hospital or other medical setting ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on presentation and first reading ( tessa munt , supported by mr alistair carmichael , presented a bill to abolish the t8 exemption from environmental permit requirements regarding disposal of end - of - life tyres ; to make provision about including end - of - life tyres as a category of notifiable waste ; to make provision about the processing , recovery , and export of end - of - life tyres ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on motion for leave to bring in a bill ( i beg to move , that leave be given to bring in a bill to make provision to remove crown immunity as it applies to prisons for the purposes of health and safety legislation . katie allen lived in clarkston in east renfrewshire . she had a loving family and a very happy childhood . she was bright and did well at school . she took herself off to malawi to volunteer , and she returned from africa determined to help people . instead of studying geology at university , as she had intended , she switched to study human geography , because she decided and realised that it was people whom she cared about and not rocks . she was excited about the future . she had moved into her own flat . she was full of life . she was beautiful and she was loved . she was found hanging in a cell at 5.50 in the morning on the problem of prison deaths is uk - wide , but these losses are a particular problem in scotland , and the loss of young people in prisons is felt especially . research in april by the scottish centre for crime and justice research found that our prison death rates are akin to those in azerbaijan . an earlier study by the council of europe found scotland ’s prison suicide rate was more than two - and - a half - times higher than the average and about double that of england and wales . i begin with katie ’s story because focusing on her case helps makes sense of why this problem is so alarming , so acute , and so avoidable . in 2017 , after a night out , katie drove home after drinking , clipped the kerb , and lost control of her car . she had not realised it , but she had hit and injured a pedestrian . she had no previous convictions . her victim asked for her not to be given a custodial sentence , but she was jailed for 16 months anyway . if anyone deserved a second chance after a stupid , youthful mistake , it was katie . that second chance was taken away because of failings by the scottish prison service . we can not mention katie without also mentioning william brown , whom my hon . friend years after both deaths , nobody in the prison or the prison service had thought to remove the doorstops , or to replace them with safer , sloping alternatives . the bunk beds had not been removed . the fatal accident inquiry into the deaths found that internal reviews carried out after both deaths had not even mentioned the possibility of removing fixtures in cells that could have been used again for further suicides . for me , nothing signifies the institutional lack of care more than these failings for which somebody , somewhere should have been held legally responsible . before a fatal accident inquiry , there is an investigation . the police and the crown office and procurator fiscal service concluded at first that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute . the families of katie and william challenged that conclusion , and eventually the authorities said that , yes , there was enough evidence to charge the scottish prison service with breaches of the health and safety at work etc . act 1974 . however , there was no prosecution . why ? because of crown immunity . the health and safety at work etc . act places duties on state - run prisons , but crown immunity means that they can not be prosecuted for breaching those duties . if the two people had died in a privately run prison , there would have been a prosecution . in theory , individual prison officers can be prosecuted , but in practice they rarely are when their employer is not also prosecuted . indeed , the reason those prosecutions do not happen is that it is argued that individual shortcomings happen in the context of systematic failures . in theory , the prison services can also be prosecuted under corporate manslaughter legislation , but in practice they are not because the systematic failings are often judged to take place at the prison level , rather than at the senior management level of the overall service . those at the bottom pass legal responsibility upwards ; those at the top pass it back . even with the support of the dogged campaigners at the charity inquest , which focuses on state - related deaths , nobody is found legally responsible . the best that the families of the lost can hope for in such circumstances is a censure by the health and safety executive , but even that toothless sanction is almost never used — in a decade , only one prison has received a censure . we have been here before . three decades ago , crown immunity was removed from the nhs and it has had an impact . to take one grimly comparable case , the essex partnership university nhs foundation trust was fined £ 1.5 million for allowing suicides after failing to manage the risks caused by ligature points on its estate . our prisons are responsible for many more such deaths , but they are untouchable because of crown immunity , and an untouchable service remains unaccountable . institutional impunity removes the incentives for institutional change — institutional change that is needed at the local scottish level and the uk level . locally , a review of mental health at polmont warned that it needed a suicide prevention strategy , but instead it opted for another review — a review that was never finished . in scotland , the human rights commission has warned that recommendations agreed decades ago have still not been implemented across the scottish prison service . just last week , the inspector of prisons for the whole uk issued an urgent indication warning about conditions at pentonville and a failure to address repeated concerns following recent suicides . without legal consequences , prisons across the country appear to be incapable of learning lessons or making changes . every day of immunity brings the risk of more avoidable deaths . the scottish prison service and the government in edinburgh have called for crown immunity to be removed , but they need us in this place to do it . i want to be very clear : this campaign should not be used as an excuse for inaction now . these places should not have to wait to be prosecuted to fulfil their responsibility to protect lives , but if those running our prisons will not act — and they have not done so — they should lose their protection from legal consequence . in conclusion , i remember a friend of mine who lost a child saying how a parent grieves twice for such a loss : once for the young person known and loved , and a second time for the life that they would have gone on to live . for katie ’s family , the knowledge that she wanted to live a life devoted to helping and serving others invites them to imagine all the change that she would have made as she grew into adulthood . instead of a life that would have changed the world , we in this place are left with the tragic responsibility of making sure that it is her death that changes things . katie ’s extraordinary mother , linda , told me that she said of her experience in malawi in africa : “ you know mum , prayers are great , but what people really need is practical help . ” katie ’s family , william ’s family and the others who have lost dear loved ones due to these institutional failings do not need our prayers , our sympathies or our condolences . they need action . they need us to provide the accountability that will avoid future tragedies and change the culture that allows these deaths . that is why it is time to end crown immunity in prisons in scotland and across the uk . i urge members to support my bill . question put and agreed to . ordered , that blair mcdougall and martin rhodes present the bill . blair mcdougall accordingly presented the bill . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on be printed ( bill 294 ) . i beg to move , that this house has considered matters to be raised before the forthcoming adjournment . i should say , for the benefit of new members , that this is quite rightly called the sir david amess debate , because this was his debate . i remember a poor minister having to respond to him after a five - minute time limit had been put on speeches but he had still managed to raise 27 topics . it was his absolute dream to have this debate , and somewhere he will be looking on and observing what we all have to say . may he rest in peace . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] we seem to be over halfway through 2025 , yet it seems like only yesterday that we came back from the christmas break . in true british style , the weather can not decide whether we should have saharan sunshine or tropical rainfall — all of which makes the tube journey into this place even more of a challenge . it has been a busy few months for parliament and across my constituency . i have been doing my job hosting residents ’ tours and events , speaking in the chamber , visiting schools and local businesses , piloting a presentation bill and chairing the backbench business committee and the 1922 committee — and finally , after 17 years , tottenham hotspur has won a trophy . i am pleased that backbench business debates have become very popular with members , and it is encouraging that so many have made applications to the committee . i would like to place on record my thanks to the committee and the clerks for all the hard work they have done over these past few months . we now have a waiting list , and if anyone applies for a debate in the chamber , i am afraid they will have to wait until 2026 before one will be granted , because we have such a long waiting list . i thank the leader of the house for meeting me on occasion to discuss the work that the committee does and to ensure that back benchers have the opportunity to raise their own topics . in the true tradition of these adjournment debates , i will raise the subject of making stanmore station step - free . we seem to actually be making some progress , because queensbury and canons park tube stations on the jubilee line are now on the shortlist to get lifts . that is great news for my residents and cause for some celebration . however , stanmore station is still not on the list . commuters there face the choice of climbing 48 steps to the main entrance hall , 16 steps via the car park or 24 steps at the side to the bus stop , or taking the current so - called step - free route , which is 140 metres long and has a steep ramp that even the great paralympian tanni grey - thompson could not go up unaided . transport for london and the mayor consider stanmore station to be step - free and will not consider any further work , but i have discovered through a 2017 freedom of information request that there is no legal definition of a step - free station . it is up to each individual train operating company — in this case tfl — to determine what it means . taken in conjunction with the transport committee ’s excellent report on accessibility issues faced by disabled people in the transport sector , i am now exploring how we can get tfl or the government to take action . if we can get a proper definition of “ step - free ” agreed , we can apply pressure on tfl to de - list stanmore station as step - free so that it meets the requirements to be considered for a new lift or travelator . the world has never been so dangerous , and that is particularly true of london . the news that police station front desks will be closing not just in harrow but across london is incredibly worrying . this comes at a time when knife and street crime are at an all - time high in the capital , with total crime increasing by 5.6 % this year alone . additionally , there has been a 30 % increase in gun crime , a 10 % increase in robbery and a whopping 82.5 % increase in business robbery . the timing of the decision to cut police stations ’ resources is another example of the mayor of london ’s impeccable timing . it is important to me and our residents that the desks remain open , because they provide a vital service , allowing victims to report crime in person and to seek safety . will my hon . friend give way ? i will not , because many members want to get in . the justification for these “ tough choices ” is the need to address a £ 260 million funding gap , yet this is not the right area in which to be cutting vital support . for years , sadiq khan has told us how much better london would be with a labour mayor and a labour government , but we now have a labour mayor and a labour government , and london is no better as a result . i have created a petition calling on the mayor to keep harrow police station fully functioning , and i urge everyone in my constituency to visit my website and add their name to this important cause . tomorrow , barnet ’s strategic planning committee will decide whether to approve the broadwalk redevelopment , which is a proposal for 3,828 housing units across 25 towers , most of which are above 20 storeys high , with the highest reaching 29 storeys . it would demolish edgware ’s existing bus station , bus garage and car park , with no guaranteed replacement . i reject this development in its entirety until a safe , deliverable transport plan can be guaranteed . the plan currently depends on an underground electric bus garage that the london fire brigade has objected to , calling it a very serious safety risk with no existing regulations or precedents . tfl has claimed that the alternative — the diesel fallback — is not viable , is uncosted and is not supported by an engineering plan . if the scheme is approved , edgware could lose its core transport infrastructure permanently . i have created a petition against these plans , which can also be accessed on my website , and i urge everyone to sign it . we are all very conscious of the escalating situation in the middle east , and my prayers are with all those who have been impacted . the events that have unfolded in the middle east since as a direct consequence of hamas ’ actions on it is welcome news that the us has facilitated a ceasefire between iran and israel , which must be upheld to secure regional security . the government and the foreign office must clarify their role in relation to that ceasefire . iran must never be allowed to obtain nuclear weapons , as it is a prolific state sponsor of terrorism with a stated intention of annihilating the world ’s only jewish state . my colleagues and i are clear that the recent actions taken by the united states alongside israel to degrade iran ’s nuclear weapons programme and military capabilities were indeed necessary . i am concerned that the uk has not given a strong voice on that outcome . the uk faces an increasingly complex and concerning landscape of malign foreign influence . iranian influence in particular has been persistent and insidious in trying to harm our civic institutions and challenge our democratic resilience . one of its shocking tactics is exploitation of our charity sector , with such charities having become the nerve centre of the islamic republic of iran on british soil , advancing a foreign policy rooted in regional destabilisation and ideological extremism . it was revealed by united against nuclear iran — published in the times — that labaik ya zahra , a uk - registered charity based in my constituency , went to iran , met senior commanders of the islamic revolutionary guard corps and signed an agreement with the propaganda arm of the highest military authority of iran ’s regime , the head of which is sanctioned in the uk , pledging to spread the ideals of jihad , martyrdom and resistance in the uk . that is in clear violation of the government ’s foreign influence registration scheme and the national security act 2023 , as well as violating british sanctions , yet the charity remains open today . hostile states are increasingly testing the resilience of our democracy . in the light of the recent intelligence and security committee report detailing the irgc ’s direct involvement in such threats , including plots on uk soil and direct interference in the uk public sector , more than 100 parliamentarians have signed a letter co - led by me and it is disappointing that the tobacco and vapes bill has stalled somewhat in the other place , with no set date for its committee . there is a risk that because the smoke - free generation policy in the bill has an implementation date in 2027 , the bill is not seen as urgent . that is not the case . while we delay , tobacco companies are marketing heated tobacco products in supermarkets , and children are exposed to them . the marketing is working , and children ’s awareness of such products is at an all - time high , with 24 % of 11 to 17 - year - olds knowing what heated tobacco is , up from 7.1 % just three years ago . will the minister confirm that the bill is a priority for the government and that its committee will begin before the conference recess in the autumn ? the same is true for nicotine pouches . i am sure that many hon . members will have seen when travelling into london on the tube brightly coloured adverts for these products . children are seeing them , too , with a record 43 % level of awareness among young people . there is currently no age - of - sale limit for those products , so a nine - year - old could legally purchase them . will the government put a stop to that madness and urgently schedule a date for peers to begin scrutinising the tobacco and vapes bill , which was overwhelmingly passed by this house ? this year alone , i have visited 12 schools , and i know that many colleagues will have visited schools in their constituencies . i welcome the government ’s commitment to breakfast clubs for primary schoolchildren , but every primary school in my constituency is unable to provide the space for a breakfast club to take place , so even though they want to implement them , they can not . i was glad to meet the under - secretary of state for education , i am pleased that the consultation has finally closed on the regulations for my supported housing ( regulatory oversight ) act 2023 . i hope that that can be spurred on to the next stages so that we finally see those measures enacted , preventing the countless rogue landlords operating in the sector from exploiting vulnerable tenants . it is my understanding that the deputy prime minister is currently in breach of the law , given that she was due to create a supported housing advisory panel by august 2024 . we are yet to see that in action , and she could — literally — implement it tomorrow . the situation in bangladesh is really concerning . with the coup that took place and the new regime , we have seen attacks on minorities in bangladesh increase . i have raised this in the house several times , yet our foreign , commonwealth and development office does not seem to take proper action to call that out for what it is , which is an attack on minorities . similarly , we had the horrific terrorist attack in pahalgam and india ’s subsequent counter - terrorism action , operation sindoor . i remain deeply appalled and saddened by the barbaric attack on the innocent tourists , which claimed the lives of 26 people , including women and children , hindus , christians and a nepali national . my thoughts are with the victims and their loved ones , and i continue to stand in solidarity with them and the people of india . on the response to that , it is good that there is currently a pause and a truce between india and pakistan ; however , that truce is very fragile and there could be a return to war . as someone who has stood with the kashmiri pandits and their right to return to the kashmir valley , and with india ’s sovereign right to defend its people and territory , i think it is outrageous that such terrorism , sponsored by pakistan , continues in jammu and kashmir . it is therefore right that we stand in solidarity with india . last week , we heard that the home office would finally be un - pausing claims relating to syrian nationals , which i am sure we all welcome . i bring that up because my office has several cases that pertain to syrian nationals in limbo with the home office , awaiting updates and decisions , one of which was first brought to my attention nearly two years ago . clearly , the government ’s home office policy changes have created confusion and delay . may we therefore have an update on when syrian nationals can expect to have their cases processed so that we can close some of them for the benefit of the individuals ? while we are on the topic of the home office , once again i pay tribute to the wonderful caseworkers at the home office mp account management team , who have been fantastic in dealing with the many cases that my office sends through . it is said that a week in politics is a long time . well , the last three years have been transformational in conservative - run harrow . we took over the council when it was just 18 months from declaring bankruptcy , with dwindling reserves and corruption in the highways department — a matter that i have raised in the house before . yet now , it could hardly be thought to be the same organisation . everyone asks about the state of roads , pavements and potholes . when we took over the council , we faced allegations of corruption and kickback schemes , but now the administration has committed £ 14 million a year for the next three years to invest in our ageing infrastructure . furthermore , harrow was the first london borough to use new machinery such as the jcb potholepro , otherwise known as pothole pete , which can repair potholes in as little as a few minutes . it has been revolutionary , and even though there is more to be done , and many more roads to be repaired , things are heading in the right direction . fly - tipping is down 33 % , culprits are being fined £ 1,000 each and the council has launched a wall of shame to deter people and catch culprits . bin collection rates are heading in the right direction , with fewer missed collections , and for the first time in a generation harrow has expanded the number of green flag parks , adding to the list chandos recreation ground in edgware in my constituency and hatch end riverside park in the neighbouring constituency . we also began one - hour free parking , the most generous free parking offer in all london boroughs , which has been used millions of times by residents to support our local businesses and high streets . even though there is a lot more to do , it is clear that harrow is heading in the right direction as the conservatives put residents first . i hope that they are returned at the local elections next year to carry on that good work for another four years . we will all shortly go on our summer recess and members and staff will take a well - deserved break , but at the beginning of august , i will be hosting my annual work experience programme . i will welcome to my constituency 25 work experience students a week for two weeks and i will teach them what it is like to be an mp and how they can get involved in politics . over the last 15 years , i have welcomed thousands of young people into the programme , with many going on to work in my office or elsewhere on the parliamentary estate . it is a great way to engage with constituents and the younger generation and to inspire them to get involved and learn about the parliamentary processes . i shall conclude my remarks by wishing everyone a lovely summer recess and a well - deserved break . i hope everyone can get some rest and recuperation with their family , enjoying good food and good company with their loved ones . i also wish all the staff of the house a chance to get a break from all of us . i am sure we can all say amen to that . there are 34 members seeking to intervene in this debate , and we need to go on to the wind - ups at about 6.30 . work it out for yourselves : that is about five minutes a head . i am not going to put a time limit on at this stage , but it may mean that some people drop off the end if colleagues are over - zealous with their time . i recognise that it is a privilege to speak high up the list in this important sir david amess debate . just over a year ago , we welcomed not only a new labour government but the creation of the new blaydon and consett constituency . it is fair to say that there was some bemusement locally about our new boundaries . the new constituency spans towns and villages in both gateshead and county durham , all with strong identities of their own , but we have plenty in common , from the keelmen on the tyne to the steelworkers of consett , and not forgetting the vital role played by our women in our history or our strong mining history . we have a really powerful industrial past and a strong community spirit . my constituents are passionate about fairness and access to opportunity , and they know the real division is not gateshead or durham , but whether you are black and white or red and white . i have had many highlights over the years serving my wonderful constituency , but top of that list has to be securing wave 1 funding for the new hospital in consett to replace shotley bridge . after years of broken promises from the last government , we are now expecting construction to begin by 2026 - 27 . i want to say a massive thank you to kevin earley and the shotley bridge hospital support group , and to everyone in the local community for their efforts . that work continues , and we welcomed the health secretary to consett earlier this year to discuss progress . i am grateful to the support group and the trust for working with me to ensure that we get everything in the right place to deliver for people in consett . there is currently concern about the out - of - hours urgent treatment service in shotley bridge . this is an issue i have been raising and i would encourage my constituents to submit to the ongoing consultation , as i will be . this year , the government made transformational changes to employment rights , strengthening sick pay and moving towards fair pay agreements in adult social care . in april , the real - terms increase in the minimum wage meant that one in seven workers in the north - east saw a boost to their pay packet . this is what a labour government mean to my constituents . we have had more constituency wins this year . moorside primary became an early adopter of our free breakfast club programme , shotley bridge school received funding for its nursery , and we have had investment for the oakfields gp practice in hamsterley colliery . i welcome government funding to restore the tyne bridge , a vital part of our regional infrastructure . finally , we have also had the launch of the gateshead safe haven , led by gateshead citizens advice bureau and north east counselling , to support people in mental health crisis , and 58,000 children across gateshead and durham will now benefit from a mental health support team in their school — an issue particularly close to my heart . none of this would be possible without the work of local people on the ground , so i thank all of them for everything that they do . if there is one issue that remains high on the agenda for my constituents , it is bus services . after years of deregulation and slashed routes , residents feel unable to rely on our buses . that needs to change . i am proud that this government ’s bus services ( no . 2 ) bill will hand back control to our communities , and i look forward to working with our mayor , kim mcguinness , to ensure that that is the case . this year , i have talked to staff at consett empire about how we can keep the theatre thriving . i have heard the concerns of staff at villa real school about the state of their building , which desperately needs improving . i will continue to raise those issues going forward . road safety and speed limits are another major issue for my constituents , and i look forward to working with ministers on the road safety strategy to resolve those concerns . i was proud to join the rowlands family from consett at a ministerial meeting . they spoke eloquently about their son andrew , who lost his life in an accident involving an uninsured under - age driver . i pay tribute to all the families in my constituency campaigning for change after going through difficult times . another shout - out must go to terry archbold and his daughter bea from burnopfield , who have been raising awareness of organ donation following bea ’s lifesaving heart transplant . it is an honour to have a front - row seat for the fantastic work happening across all our communities in our schools , nhs , shops , libraries , care homes and leisure centres . this year , i have tapped my feet to the fantastic ryton singers and winlaton ’s northern phoenix brass band , and admired photography by ryton camera club and consett in focus . i have met local environment pioneers at the crawcrook repair café , the chopwell regeneration shop , blackhill park ’s community garden and the greenside community orchard . that is not forgetting our small businesses , including those who met the minister when he visited consett last year . thanks to all who showed him what our patch has to offer and spoke about their experiences . i am always inspired by young people in our constituency . this year , we have had visits to parliament from st joseph ’s in blaydon , st mary ’s in blackhill , and derwentside college , and i hope that more schools will have this opportunity in future . i thank parkhead , st thomas more and st patrick ’s in dipton for opening their doors to me , as well as high spen and ryton primary schools for their fantastic local murals and artwork . i got a good grilling from students at consett academy , and the pupils ’ parliament in shotley bridge showed me how democracy is done — westminster will be in good hands if we put the children of blaydon and consett in charge . i thank all the school staff for their hard work . i was pleased to meet headteachers from across our constituency to hear about the issues they face , and they have provided me with insights that i will feed back to government . i pay tribute to the fantastic volunteers supporting our community . there are too many to name , but i want to give a quick shout - out to moorside baby bank , newcastle united foundation ’s walking football in blaydon , consett survivors of bereavement by suicide , derwent valley car club and ryton ’s men ’s shed . i can only hope that i can match their passion and commitment for our communities . finally , i want to thank my constituency team . since the election , we have opened a second office in consett , and they have processed over 8,000 cases . i thank the doorkeepers and house staff for everything they do to keep parliament running . i thank my constituents , new and old , who make blaydon and consett a fantastic place to be . it is an honour to represent this constituency , and i will continue working every day to ensure that our people have the opportunities they deserve . i rise to talk about lord anderson ’s report on prevent and the death of our wonderful fallen colleague and my dear friend , sir david amess , which was published last week . it is obviously appropriate to make this speech today , in the sir david amess adjournment debate , which is rightly named in his honour . however , it is sad that this speech aims to draw attention to the way in which he and his family have been and are being let down by the home secretary and this government . the house is well aware that the sir david amess family would like a full statutory public inquiry into the death of their beloved father and husband . last march , they met the prime minister and the home secretary at 10 downing street . they were supported by their former mp anna firth , leading london lawyers , and public affairs expert radd seiger , all of whom continue to support and help the family on a voluntary basis . at that meeting , the home secretary and the prime minister asked the family to go away and work with lord anderson , to see if he could answer the dozens of questions they still have about why the killer slipped through the state ’s safeguarding nets . against their better judgement , the family did just that . they met lord anderson , along with their advisers and anna firth , in his chambers in the middle temple . they provided lord anderson with all the questions that they still needed answering , and they waited patiently for his report , enduring several more months of stress and anxiety . both the home secretary and lord anderson specifically promised the family that they would see the report first , and in good time , so that they had time to read and digest it , and take advice , before being subjected to the glare of the media . you can only imagine , mr deputy speaker , how deeply distressing the whole media circus is for the family . unbelievably , yet again , that did not happen . the family first learned that the report was imminent from an article in the guardian , and when they received a text from a journalist saying that the report was due to be published soon . clearly , rather than keep their word to the amess family , the government chose quite deliberately to leak the report to the press first . that is an absolute disgrace . the amess family should have seen the report first , not last . that is a simply unacceptable way to treat any grieving family , let alone that of a distinguished parliamentarian . once again , the amess family were bombarded by the media , causing them great pain . all the media wanted , of course , was their individual soundbite , before the family had any opportunity to even read the 170 - page report . the home secretary should feel thoroughly ashamed . i hope that the minister will take this opportunity to apologise to lady amess and her family for this latest insult . the government really need to do far , far , better on how they treat the victims of heinous crimes . critically , however , there is now no doubt whatsoever , following lord anderson ’s work , that there must be a full public inquiry on why the string of failures that led to sir david ’s murder were allowed to happen , and on who was responsible , who will be held to account , and what will be done to ensure that there is no repeat . the amess family have been told repeatedly by the home secretary and successive ministers that lessons had been and would be learned by prevent , including the lessons set out in the prevent learning review , which took place shortly after sir david ’s death and was published earlier this year . heartbreakingly , southport happened three years later . the two cases are virtually identical . in both , the killer was well known to the authorities and to the prevent programme , yet was allowed to slip through the safeguarding net . it seems , therefore , that lessons have not been learned . the amess family feel that both the home secretary and the prime minister were paying lip service to their agonising search for real answers when they finally met them at no . 10 in march . the family were assured by both the prime minister and the home secretary that they took the family ’s concerns extremely seriously , that they too felt the loss of sir david acutely , and that they would leave no stone unturned to help the family find the answers that they needed . i will finish with the words of katie amess herself — before my right hon . friend finishes , will he give way very briefly ? order . no . all right . sorry . i will end with the words of katie amess herself — sir david was my best friend , mr deputy speaker . he was . order . i think the father of the house was reaching his peroration . i am fully aware of the friendship between in the words of katie amess herself , “ despite lord anderson ’s review , the vast majority of our questions about prevent ’s failures remain unanswered . we still do not know why basic checks like social media monitoring or verifying school attendance were not carried out before the perpetrator was released from the programme . he was meant to have seven sessions . he had one , over a cup of coffee at mcdonald ’s , and was then released . that is simply not good enough , yet anderson skates over it , ignoring the catastrophic consequences that followed for my family , and our country . critical records , including minutes from panel meetings and vulnerability assessments , have either been withheld or were incomplete . that does not help any of us . transparency is essential , yet we continue to face obstacles in accessing these documents . other than the killer himself , there has been no accountability for my family . the review revealed alarming gaps in the handling of the killer after he was referred . unsubstantiated claims were made about his supposed progress , yet no one has been held to account . this is n’t about process , it ’s about people ’s lives and our right to see that those who let my dad down are held fully responsible . key individuals involved in the case were not interviewed , and the coroner refused to engage with lord anderson , having already refused us an inquest . a full statutory inquiry would compel all those involved to give evidence under oath about the failings . my dad gave his all to this country , and yet he , and we , are being denied the most basic of human rights . it feels like they are trying to hide something , to shut this tragedy down . a statutory public inquiry is the only way to compel witnesses to testify and documents to be disclosed … on behalf of my family , i now call on the current home secretary and prime minister to do the right thing and to order the inquiry , just as they rightly did for southport . they told my mother and me and anna firth that we could come back to no 10 if we were not happy with lord anderson ’s review . well , we most certainly are not happy with it , and i will be asking my team to write to them to request that further meeting they promised us . a public inquiry would honour my father ’s legacy by ensuring real accountability and preventing future tragedies . lastly , my father dedicated his life to public service . the very least he deserves is a thorough investigation into how his murder could have been prevented . we owe it to him and to every potential future victim to get this right . we have had review after review since my father died . we now call for a public inquiry . ” let right be done . it would be remiss of me not to pay tribute to that exceptional and powerful speech from i will be very brief . i want to pay tribute to sir david amess . an issue dear to his heart that he spoke about frequently was hepatitis patients , and that is what i want to speak about . i hope the house will agree that it is a timely and appropriate occasion , because next i would like to say a few things about this condition . hepatitis c is a blood - borne virus that disproportionately affects disadvantaged and marginalised communities . it is preventable , treatable and curable . indeed , the united kingdom has already committed to achieving the world health organisation ’s goal of eliminating hepatitis c as a public health concern by 2030 . that would have a huge impact on health inequalities . it would be encouraging if the uk government were to celebrate world hepatitis day on many people do not realise that they have hepatitis c , but if left untreated , it can cause fatal cirrhosis , and even liver cancer . the efforts of our nhs and harm reduction services have led to considerable success in finding , engaging , testing and treating people who are at risk . the uk is within reach of meeting the world health organisation ’s target of hepatitis c elimination by 2030 . that would be a tremendous public health achievement for a government who are committed to addressing health inequalities and public health issues , but to sustain the success that we have had so far , we must overcome stigma , avoid complacency and support effective efforts and commitments to achieving positive public health outcomes . i am delighted to have been called in the debate on the summer adjournment , which i am very pleased is now traditionally known as the sir david amess debate , after our fallen comrade and great friend sir david . following the brilliant speech by the father of the house , my right hon . friend perhaps the most pressing issue in wickford in my constituency is the fate of the old dilapidated co - op supermarket site . it was purchased several years ago by an overseas developer named heriot , which singularly failed to find a new tenant . in fairness , it attempted to negotiate a deal with morrisons , which fell through . it instead tried to negotiate a deal with asda , which fell through too . i am afraid that in the recent wickford park by - election , the labour party claimed in its literature that a deal with asda had been “ secured ” , and it was thus trying to take the credit . in fact , it turns out that that was simply untrue . i recently received a letter from mr allan leighton , the chief executive of asda , which unfortunately confirmed that after over a year of negotiations , it had reluctantly decided not to proceed with the redevelopment of the wickford site . i have to say that that has not enhanced asda in my eyes . nevertheless , back in february heriot applied to basildon borough council for planning permission for a new store , but the council repeatedly dragged its feet and failed to determine the application to the point that , i understand , a developer could appeal to the planning inspectorate on the grounds of non - determination . it is absolutely vital that that planning application is passed by basildon borough council in the hope that heriot can find an alternative tenant , such as lidl or another supermarket group . having tried for nearly four years to achieve that , if heriot is not able to do so , perhaps the time has finally come for it to sell the site to an alternative developer with more experience , which might have more luck . either way , i can report to the house that my constituents are thoroughly fed up with the whole drama of the old co - op supermarket , as am i. for the sake of all my constituents in wickford , i hope that we can somehow bring this prolonged saga to a successful conclusion and provide them with a new supermarket fit for the 21st century . let me end my contribution with a few remarks on so - called devolution and local government reform . this has been a torturous process in essex , made more difficult by the fact that there is absolutely no public demand at all for the changes . i can confidently report to the house that in 24 years as an essex mp , i have never once had a constituent tell me on the doorstep that they wanted a mayor of essex . none the less , ministers recently wrote to essex mps to confirm that they are going ahead with a mayor of essex , loosely based on the sadiq khan model in london , with a related combined authority . that will result in mayoral elections across the whole of essex in spring next year . the government ’s proposals would in effect replace the current two - tier system with another two - tier system . at present , we have essex county council as the upper tier and a lower tier of district , borough and city councils . under the government ’s plan , that would give way to an upper tier of an elected mayor and a combined authority , with a lower tier of multiple unitary authorities beneath . the third tier of town and parish councils would remain unaffected . however , it is not yet clear whether the labour government still intend to press ahead with their plans to create several unitary authorities in essex — a matter that has led to much consternation and considerable disagreement , not least among the potential constituent authorities themselves . as of today , there are multiple different potential configurations . essex county council seems to want three unitary authorities . rochford district council and some other councils would prefer four . the labour party appears to be agitating in favour of five . contrary to the position of its own party , labour - led thurrock council has just announced that it would prefer four , the constituent local authorities of which it is yet to reveal . indeed , at a meeting of council leaders earlier this week , some labour council leaders were openly disagreeing with each other over all this . the whole process is rapidly descending into a total farce , and having followed this issue closely for many years , i have yet to hear a truly compelling case for why any of these new authorities would genuinely be more efficient . as ever , we are promised efficiency savings in year 5 , but as a former minister , i have to tell current ministers from long experience that year 5 never comes . to conclude , i say in all sincerity to ministers that if they press ahead regardless and impose a solution via ministerial order with no consensus , it will still take a parliament to implement . in the meantime , local government will almost grind to a halt , and many of the best officers will leave . it definitely will not save the money that has been promised , and therefore the game simply is not worth the candle . if i could offer ministers in the department some honest advice , it would be this : pull stumps now while you can . if you must go ahead with the mayor , do that , but drop the unitary idea and let the local district , borough and city councils get on with the job of representing their people , and let us have elections for those councils . children are 20 % of the population , but 100 % of our future . i see that every time i visit a school in newcastle upon tyne east and wallsend . we know that the first few years of a child ’s life are crucial , laying the foundation for their overall development . for that reason , i am delighted that battle hill primary school in wallsend is in the initial cohort to benefit from the government ’s expansion of school - based nurseries . that school is in one of the most deprived areas of the ward , and has always done a fantastic job of supporting families . it previously had a sure start facility , and as someone who used to be a ward councillor and a governor , i was always proud to say that it cared for children from birth to 11 years . i am excited to say that that is the aspiration once again . to remain on the topic of our young people , the north - east mayoral combined authority recently approved an £ 8.5 million investment for the expansion of the energy academy in my constituency . the offshore energy industries along the tyne are a source of enormous pride . the tyne is open for business , and the expansion of the energy academy only strengthens that case . that funding will be used to create a new energy campus , tripling the number of students who will be able to enrol each year . the offshore renewable energy sector is set to create an additional 4,500 jobs in manufacturing and engineering along the river over the next decade . it is right that a young person growing up in any of the wards in my constituency should have the opportunity to compete for new green jobs . however , if companies and local officials are moving the earth to ensure that the jobs and investment are there , we can not allow obstacles to get in the way . when i say “ obstacles ” , i mean it in the literal sense ; for eight years , i have led a campaign to remove the power cables over the tyne , which are a barrier to businesses securing work for large renewable energy structures . last year , the institute for public policy research identified newcastle as the travel to work area with the third highest green potential in britain . however , the current situation puts at risk possible net gross value added benefits of up to £ 1.2 billion . it has been proposed that the removal of the cables will be completed in 2032 . that is too late — the race for green jobs is now . over the years , few have championed tyneside ’s industrial strength as powerfully as the shepherd family , and i take this opportunity to thank them for their tireless work . the employment they have created along the tyne is commendable , and they have convened some of the sharpest minds in the private sector to help solve some of the biggest problems we face . i welcome walker north ’s inclusion in the list of trailblazer neighbourhoods announced at the spending review . that area will receive up to £ 20 million over the next decade to support its renewal , and i look forward to working with the community to ensure that that funding is used where it is needed . as chair of the responsible vaping all - party parliamentary group , i remain concerned that efforts to reduce the number of smokers continue to plateau . action on smoking and health ’s research that 13 % of adults in britain smoke , and that this figure has remained at the same level since 2021 , is alarming . over half of adults who smoke and who would benefit from switching completely to vaping wrongly believe that it is equally as harmful as smoking , or even more harmful . i hope that when the tobacco and vapes bill returns later this year , that misperception about relative harms will not be made worse . i encourage the government to make clear in other health - related announcements that vaping is a safer option for smokers looking to quit . i will end on a happy and congratulatory note . i recently tabled two early - day motions celebrating the hard work of individuals who have dedicated their life to public service . the first motion applauds dame norma redfearn after a long and successful life in education and as the elected mayor of north tyneside . the long list of achievements in my edm explains why she is widely known in the north - east just by her first name . norma ’s involvement in the creation of the greggs foundation breakfast clubs in 1999 , after setting up her own as a headteacher , changed countless lives . the second motion concerns gary kent , who has worked in parliament for 38 years and has been my researcher for 14 . after two decades of anglo - irish peace work , he was secretary for nearly 20 years of the all - party parliamentary group on the kurdistan region in iraq . mps used his experience as a cross - party and transnational activist , and the group helped build a stronger kurdish - british relationship . such people in public life can inspire others and advance the common good . before i begin , may i associate myself with the remarks from the father of the house , my right hon . friend i will raise an important issue that has been raised on a number of occasions by members : private management companies , their management of housing estates and the outrageous charges that they make . the land management firm greenbelt manages the open spaces of scartho top in the part of grimsby that i represent . many residents of scartho top have complained to me about the onerous fees they are required to pay for the upkeep of those public spaces . the charges exacerbate the existing cost of living pressures that many residents face , and that is not to mention the unfairness of a subset of residents being tied into paying estate charges for public spaces . some of the charges that my constituents have highlighted include tree works at a cost of £ 3,110 , planting works at a cost of £ 2,989 , site management inspections at £ 11,664 , and the cost for contractors amounting to almost £ 45,000 . as such , on behalf of my constituents , i am calling on the government to address this unfairness and implement the recommendations highlighted by the competition and markets authority following its study into house building . as ministers will be aware , the cma called on the government to implement mandatory adoption of public amenities on new housing estates . i note that the government ’s response to the cma ’s study states that while they welcome the cma ’s work , they “ intend to consult publicly on the best way to bring the injustice of ‘ fleecehold ’ private estates and unfair costs to an end ” . they intend to gather evidence to supplement the cma report . i understand the government will be inviting views from a range of experts , and i hope that can be concluded quickly . the cma also called for the introduction of “ enhanced consumer protection measures , underpinned by a robust enforcement regime , for households living under private management arrangements . ” these measures would include : increasing the amount of information that homeowners are entitled to receive to understand what they are paying for ; introducing a right to challenge the reasonableness of housing management charges at the first tier tribunal in england , or at leasehold valuation tribunals in wales ; and , giving homeowners the right to apply to a tribunal to appoint a manager in the event of a serious failure . the government accepted those recommendations in principle while highlighting that secondary legislation is required to implement them . once again , a public consultation would be required . finally on this topic , i note that the minister for housing and planning , earlier today , there was an urgent question following the announcement that the prax oil refinery in my constituency was likely to close , which will have an enormous impact on the local economy . that leads me to return to a subject that i have raised scores of times in the house . if the local economy is to thrive and the government ’s growth agenda is to be met , we must have more transport connections to northern lincolnshire . the a180 , which serves the ports of grimsby and immingham , is in an appalling state , consisting of only a two - lane dual carriageway . its enhancement to make it a full motorway is essential . access to our major ports is , i believe , still a government priority — it certainly was when i was a member of the transport committee — and i hope that the government will address this issue , as well as joining my campaign , along with my right hon . friend the member for gainsborough , for the renewed rail connection between cleethorpes , grimsby , market rasen and king ’s cross . hear , hear . i knew my right hon . friend would say that . finally , mr deputy speaker , i wish you and everyone else a very happy recess . it is an absolute honour to speak in my first sir david amess adjournment debate . sir david , as we all know , worked tirelessly for his constituents . he set the right example for us all by demonstrating that politics at its best is about service , not spectacle . it remains the honour of my life to speak up for the good people of stoke - on - trent north and kidsgrove . people in our area have had a tough time of it . it was heartbreaking to see our community hollowed out by 14 years of austerity . today , however , i am proud to say that the tide is turning . after years of decline , we are finally starting to fix what has been broken . we are giving our young people the best start in life . i recall , long before i became an mp , hearing heartbreaking stories of kids arriving at school hungry . we got to work , and over the past few months we have started to roll out free breakfast clubs at milton and greenways primary academies , and i thoroughly enjoyed visiting both of them . breakfast clubs will soon be available at all primary schools in stoke - on - trent north and kidsgrove , and that fills me with pride . smallthorne primary academy is doing fantastic work at the heart of the community . for years , parents throughout our area have missed out on opportunities because of the lack of affordable childcare , but now , with a labour government determined to ease the burden for families , we have secured funding for a school - based nursery providing much - needed places , and i will be pressing the government for more school - based nurseries in my constituency . i am excited at the prospect of returning , this friday , to a very important organisation that shaped my life and my values : ymca north staffordshire . it is where i worked for nearly two decades before i became an mp , and it is where i learned what it means to serve . i can not wait to go back to open its brand - new youth hub , a place of hope , guidance and opportunity , and a place where young people can see that someone believes in them . none of the work that i do would be possible without the tireless efforts of the team i have around me . in the past year , we have made more than 200 visits to schools , charities , businesses and residents ’ groups , and we have responded to more than 4,000 individual pieces of casework on behalf of local people — for instance , securing a place for a child in fegg hayes to go to a local send school after the family had been turned down , restoring a £ 27,000 maternity payment to a mum in talke after an incorrect deduction , and securing a 19,000 back - payment of pension credit for a burslem resident who had been waiting for over a year . all that work transforms lives , but there is still so much more to do . a few months after i was elected , both moorcroft and royal stafford , which had sustained our local economy for many generations , announced that they were closing down . it was a devastating blow to our area and our ceramics industry . happily , though , there are glimmers of hope . will moorcroft , the grandson of moorcroft ’s founder , has stepped in to safeguard the future of this iconic brand . he has protected a skilled workforce and preserved a name that carries real pride across the potteries . meanwhile , down the road in burslem — the mother town of our potteries — t. g. green has stepped in to produce fine products at the royal stafford site . this is personal for me , because my mum and grandad both worked in the potbanks of tunstall and burslem . i know what the industry means to local families , and i have kept my word by pressing ministers for support whenever i have had the opportunity , including in a westminster hall debate that i secured back in march . i am pleased that ceramics is now recognised as a foundation industry in the industrial strategy and that support with electricity costs will come in 2027 , but i will continue to raise with ministers the need for additional support for the sector between now and then . meanwhile , too many of our historic buildings still lie empty , decaying and increasingly beyond repair , but with the right support many could be brought back into use . they could be converted into affordable , high - quality homes that protect our heritage , meet urgent housing need and help to sustain our high streets and town centres . under labour , we must go further and faster to make that a reality , and i urge the relevant ministers to proactively engage with me to look at what steps can be taken . i would welcome visits to my constituency so that they can see its potential at first hand . finally , i can not stand here today without paying tribute to sharlotte - sky naglis and her family . sharlotte was only six years old when she was tragically killed by a driver who was twice the legal limit for alcohol and under the influence of drugs . since then , her family have shown remarkable strength and determination in their campaign to amend the law on blood testing after fatal road collisions . i have continued to press for the road traffic act 1988 to be amended to allow for blood samples to be tested without consent in the most serious cases where a life has been lost . i am grateful to the transport secretary , the roads minister and colleagues in the department for transport for their engagement on this matter , and i look forward to that continuing . our community has known hardship and difficulties , but we are strong . we have been knocked down , but stokies will never , ever be knocked out . now , with a government who finally have our backs , we can start building a better future for every child , every family , every person and every neighbourhood across stoke - on - trent north and kidsgrove . rose — order . we are beginning to play “ beat the clock ” . i understand that hiding in plain sight , but not discussed in this chamber since the general election , is the spending of millions of pounds on the repair of this building , with members expected to commit later this year to spending billions of pounds into the future . the lack of debate or any meaningful transparency comes despite the majority of members of this house being newly elected last july . instead , the detailed costs and any vote on options are being delayed until later this year — ironically , they will probably come at around the same time that the house is expected to vote on a budget , which many people expect to include tax rises . members of the house , and members of the public , might reasonably ask why the leader of the house has not held any such debate since coming into office . this issue speaks to a wider principle . are decisions best formulated in private when some of the numbers remain uncertain , with reliance placed on internal controls and external advisers giving assurances , or is it better to have transparency — not least on an issue of great public interest ? a lesson that , as a minister , i learned from covid is that it is better to have transparency and an open debate about the trade - offs early than to hold discussions in secret and allow the benefit of hindsight after the event . supporting greater transparency has been a theme of my time in the house , whether in my initial four years on the public accounts committee or when as a minister i overruled official advice to disclose information to the national audit office during covid . since being elected as chair of the house ’s finance committee , i have repeatedly raised concerns in private about the financial management of the house and the multibillion - pound restoration and renewal programme , but i feel it is necessary to raise these issues on the floor of the house today . before doing so , i place on record my thanks to mr speaker , because i know he cares deeply about taxpayer value — an issue he has championed on many occasions . i want to reassure members that i will not disclose any information i have received in my role as chair of the finance committee or in a private capacity . the crux of the issue is that there needs to be a complete reset of the r and r programme . the books need to be open to the public , and we need to bring the public into the debate about how we balance the needs of a world heritage site with modern security , accessibility — for example , for those with a disability — and value for money . updated costs need to be presented . currently , millions of pounds are being spent working up multiple options , despite our now being in the fifth year of this work . indeed , those options are gold - plated , often based on decisions taken by members who are no longer in the house . there is remarkably little visibility of this issue . the most recent costs presented go back to 2022 , and even then the cheapest option was £ 8.6 billion to £ 13.8 billion , with others costing more , and that is without inflation and with no other significant additions . those costs exclude the work members will see on the northern estate , which is not part of the r and r programme , yet the public would associate the two , not least because that work is a key part of any decant . we also know that there are precedents for costs increasing massively . if we take the example of the elizabeth tower — the most recent example in this house — the costs started at £ 29 million and finished at £ 89 million , which is a 209 % increase . if we look at this morning ’s news , we can see how the costs of sizewell c have increased . there are known risks in plain sight . in its first report , the national audit office cited changes to programmes as a key risk , yet we know that the sponsor body set up at the start has been scrapped . we know that we started with one option and then went up to two and then three , but with a and b options , so in essence we have four options . who knows , but there could be a fifth on the way . the governance is opaque . let me give the house an example . the key body that oversees the programme has met only once this year and only twice since the last annual report . however , if we look at what is in the public domain , the first paragraph of the annual report says that “ the r&r client board and r&r programme board will mean sufficiently robust and detailed information will be available to the new parliament to support decisions on the way forward for r&r. ” we have not debated it once , and the governing committee has met only once this calendar year . i am conscious of the time , so i will canter through some of the other issues . in short , security is often presented as a reason for not being transparent , but i would draw members ’ attention to the very welcome intervention by baroness smith in the house of lords in her exchange with lord hayward about the carriage gates , which cost £ 9.6 million . i am told that they still do not work particularly well . just last week , this house debated a mistake that was made by an official in the ministry of defence , with members complaining about both the cost to the taxpayer and whether that was covered up . how confident are members that no similar examples exist ? i simply ask members : are they aware of the costs of the work on the northern estate , of the trade - offs and how they are being shaped , or of the cost of any delay ? how confident are they that when they are asked to make such decisions alongside a budget , they will have the information they need ? i will finish with one final example . just as with high speed 2 , hiding something in plain sight involves producing lots of brochures and lots of literature . colleagues can see that one of the recent quarterly updates states on page 4 : “ r&r surveys … ongoing … budget … ongoing … develop house of commons … plans … ongoing … costed proposals … ongoing … invitation to tender … not started ” . it includes no meaningful information . indeed , the annual report has financial information only on the final two pages , pages 29 and 30 . this is not a new issue . lord morse , in his 2022 report , noted : “ parliament has a historically poor reputation for its contract management and commercial acumen . ” i believe issues should be shared with the public , the trade - offs discussed , and members of this house , particularly new members , given sight of these issues . i have called repeatedly in private for there to be greater debate . today , i want to do so on the floor of the house . it is a huge honour to speak in the sir david amess summer adjournment debate . my one story about sir david relates to a late friend of mine , julian ware - lane , who was often the labour candidate who stood against him in general elections . sadly , many years ago julian was diagnosed with cancer and spent long periods of time in hospital . sir david often visited julian in hospital to see how he was getting on , which shows us what kind of man sir david was . on one such visit he discovered that , despite having stood for election in southend on a number of occasions , julian had never actually had the opportunity to visit this place . sir david was incensed — i suppose that would be the right word — and was determined to ensure julian had the opportunity to visit parliament . sadly , julian passed away before he had that opportunity , but it goes some way to show the sort of man sir david was . he put party politics aside when it came to humanity and i think that is really important for us all to remember . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] i would like to take a moment to put on record my thanks to the health secretary for putting up with my constant lobbying on behalf of the people of harlow for the future location of the uk health security agency . i am delighted that last week he confirmed that this labour government will see it through , securing harlow ’s future . as the health secretary said last week , it is no longer a case of the oxford - cambridge corridor ; it is the oxford - cambridge - harlow corridor . i am extremely proud that it is harlow and the people of harlow who will be on the front line of the fight against biological warfare . however , for me it is about much more than that . it is about securing the jobs and careers of the future . i visit schools across harlow and the villages very week . from purford green to hare street , pemberley to matching green , jerounds to the downs , milwards to harlowbury , st james ’s to holy cross , i see the incredible potential that young people in harlow have , and in harlow college , passmores academy , sir frederick gibberd college , mark hall academy , stewards academy and burnt mill academy , i see the opportunity for that potential to grow . however , for too long that potential has not always been realised . as a former teacher — have i mentioned i used to be teacher?—one of my no . 1 aims is to see that change . i know that the uk health security agency will be a huge part of that , along with the investment that will come with it . it is an exciting time for our town with this labour government : a clear and achievable timeline for a new princess alexandra hospital ; more police on our streets — i taught one of them . i am pleased that , as part of the safer streets initiative , and after i brought it up in my first question in this house , this labour government are tackling the issue of cross - border taxi hiring ; and now we have secured the jobs of the future in harlow . it is an exciting time for harlow . despite the challenges of being a new mp , as i look forward to recess i am still incredibly proud to represent my town and my community , which boasts so many great community organisations and charities : from rainbow services to butterfly effect , to streets2homes and action for family carers — i declare an interest , because i work for both of them — and the harlow stroke rehab association . however , i would not be ambitious for my town if i did not want even more for harlow and the greater constituency . the health secretary suggested that i should start lobbying another department , but i am sure he would recognise the challenges of mental health provision in west essex . speaking to my constituent ken and his wife , sue , while out door - knocking at the weekend in harlow , i heard how they felt let down by the current system . i am determined that this labour government will address the inequality — the lack of parity — between mental health and physical health . i am really running out of time , so on a lighter note i wish harlow town all the best of luck for the rest of the season . i thank my team , my family , the house staff and everyone who has helped me during my first year in this place . being an mp remains a huge honour — i would say it is the biggest honour of my life , but if i say that , my wife might divorce me . it is an honour to speak in this debate , named after the late sir david amess , to whom i wish to pay tribute . i also use this opportunity to pay tribute to the late ian gow , one of my predecessors as a hard - working member of parliament for eastbourne , who was appallingly assassinated in 1990 , and whose shield is on the door above the entrance to this chamber . i thank all those involved in keeping mps and our teams safe today , with special mention to pc will bayley , who has helped my team and me to manage some concerning threats to us . it has been an action - packed first year as eastbourne ’s member of parliament . working with incredible campaigners from across our town and beyond , we have : secured the reopening of eastbourne district general hospital for births after months of closure ; won our campaign for a direct train from eastbourne to london bridge and back ; successfully led a national campaign to reform the law on domestic abuse ; worked with campaigners to save linden court day centre for people with learning disabilities from closure ; worked with local residents to protect the sovereign centre , where i learned to swim , from losing its pools ; worked with government and others to lock in £ 20 million in neighbourhood funding , which we thought we might lose after the election , to regenerate our town ; and much , much more . however , one year in , after taking up more than 11,000 cases for residents , and more than 200 mentions of eastbourne in the chamber later , there is still much more to do . we need to fix our temporary accommodation catastrophe , which has been triggered by a housing shortage that can be addressed only if we build more housing and properly regulate temporary accommodation . we have a particular shortage of three - bedroom homes in eastbourne , which is causing a huge challenge . as many other members have said of their constituencies , we need to address the send crisis in our town , because families such as the wilcocks and hundreds of others are left without the educational provision that they need . we need southern water to get a grip of the foul stench its water treatment works have been emitting across our town in recent months , blighting the lives of residents in langney point and beyond . we need a fix to this problem now , not next year , as southern water has said . frankly , the ceo should be denied his outrageous pay rise while this issue remains and until local residents have been properly compensated . beyond our shores , in response to the appalling situation in israel and gaza and on the west bank , the government must continue to push for the release of all hostages , urge for aid to be let unobstructed into gaza , ban arms sales to the israeli government , recognise a state of palestine , and further sanction the israeli government when they infringe international law , and that includes sanctions on netanyahu himself . it is an honour to have been elected to represent the town that made me the person i am — the town whose teachers believed in me , whose scout leaders challenged me and whose local businesses took a punt on me by giving me my first job . i hope to be able to represent our town for many , many years to come . as we draw to the end of our time before the summer recess , i would like to extend a very open invitation to eastbourne to any hon . member who has not yet booked their summer holiday . eastbourne is officially the sunniest town in the uk . it has more hours of sunlight than anywhere else in the country — to the disdain of rose — i will not take the hon . member ’s intervention , unless he is going to confirm my point . [ interruption . ] okay , i will take his intervention . one of the highlights of my first year has been being confused with the hon . gentleman on several occasions , including being left with his dinner receipt in the members ’ dining room . so , if i do go to eastbourne , i hope that he will pick up the bill for once . i certainly owe the hon . member one , but that is not quite as bad as when i was mistaken for another mixed race member when i once forgot my pass and was granted a pass of somebody else — who may or may not be i will if i may return to my point in my last 30 seconds . i say to hon . members that eastbourne is open for business . it is open for their custom and it is open for their leisure . our 94 individual beaches await . i join colleagues from across the house in paying tribute to sir david amess . luton is my home and i love it . i want to put on record the work that people in my constituency do to make it such a thriving community . whether it is people motivated through their faith , such as the amazing luton council of faiths — the churches , the mosques , the mandirs and the gurudwaras , which support people across luton north — or people ’s individual values , our community is motivated by a shared purpose to see a thriving town full of healthy people and a successful future shared by all . we are fortunate to have people who go above and beyond for our town , including robbie and lisa herrick and all those who signed my petition to secure a safer putteridge road outside the school , and those of us who are continuing to fight for a speed limit of 20 mph in both directions and improved traffic - calming measures . we have seen far too many examples of dangerous driving in luton , but especially outside schools . then we have the work of the brilliant chidi and enitan , who run the over-50s black men forum , giving older black men spaces to meet and socialise across the region , and all the public health benefits that come with that . i really wish them the best of luck when luton take on essex at their next table tennis match . groups such as greenhouse mentoring and luton someries rotary club put the success of future generations at the heart of all that they do — from raising funds for polio vaccinations abroad to working in our town , mentoring children through tough teenage years . the luton rotary club had a brilliant result in supporting children through their sats — seeing an improvement from 58 % to 83%.spending time with these groups is seriously good for the soul . our bodies — our very , very tired bodies — such as luton jets , luton town ladies and litter picks with kevin poulton ’s abcd - in - luton , all contribute quietly but powerfully to our community fabric . they make our town happy and healthy . i have loved joining the litter picks throughout the year and seeing so many young people join in , taking pride in our local environment . on growth , we have had £ 5 billion - worth of investment in our local economy in and around luton — from our airport and universal studios to goodman ’s taking over the vauxhall site . they are the biggies , but i give a shout - out to small and local businesses across luton north every single saturday . many innovative small businesses are part of our amazing community and i have loved meeting every single one of them , including stylise autos , and grand bazar supermarket which i opened on leagrave road . if ever anybody is at my office , they should pop down marsh road and speak to mashud and maroof at tamarind restaurant , and they will make sure you do not go hungry . i have just completed my 200th small business saturday , and i hope that businesses in luton north know that i am here for them and that i will continue shouting about how good they are . so far , my team has managed nearly 4,000 cases on behalf of people in luton north , but still the single biggest issue is the increasingly desperate situation in gaza , where tens of thousands people have been killed . israeli forces have destroyed every hospital in gaza , and the united nations relief and works agency struggle to provide schooling to starving children among the rubble and continued attacks . until the international community takes further action , netanyahu ’s pursuit of an ethnically cleansed palestine will not end , and the horrors of genocide will become a waking nightmare for those still alive to witness it . at the earliest opportunity , our government must recognise a palestinian state , extend arms embargoes and ensure that aid safely reaches those who need it . more than this , we need a vision that goes beyond recognition — a vision of building a palestine and middle east of safety and freedom , free from terror and violence . closer to home , pensioners in the uk have had an anxious time , but something that has not yet hit the headlines was brought to me in my last surgery at warden hill community centre . thomas lee has done the right thing all his life : he saved and paid into a pension to secure his future in later years . however , his contracted - out additional pension scheme was the state earnings - related pension scheme , or serps . the scheme ended in 2002 , meaning that thomas and some 2 million like him have lost out . it would be really welcome if any review of the pension system ensured that those like mr lee did not continue to lose out . like many in this place , my thoughts will soon turn to going home , and as they do , i really wish that leagrave station had the lifts that it was promised by the last government . nearly 2 million journeys are made from that station , and it is high time we had lifts , not scaffolding holding up our broken bridge . there is so much i would have liked to talk about today , in one of the nicest debates in parliament , but i will not take up more time . i will only say that i feel lucky to live and work in luton north . i could not ask for better people to work alongside , so let us keep walking down that road together . i am pleased to speak in the sir david amess adjournment debate . one of the highlights of my year is my annual summer surgery tour ; i hold over 75 surgeries in towns and villages across my constituency over 10 days . this is in addition to my usual monthly surgeries . the summer recess gives me the opportunity to get to the more remote and isolated parts of my constituency with my scottish parliament colleague rachael hamilton msp . there are still a few appointments available , so i encourage anyone out there who would like one to get in touch and book one . it has been another busy year . i want to focus on some of the campaigns in the scottish borders over the last year , and the incredible work of those in the borders who make our community such an amazing place to live . access to cash is a huge issue there . residents in eyemouth and selkirk have been left without adequate banking facilities for far too long . i was delighted to present a petition in the house of commons , signed by over 1,400 local people , calling for new banking hubs to be created . the scottish borders need more banking hubs , so that local people have access to the essential services they need . the hub in jedburgh in my constituency is a very good example . it serves local businesses and residents , and is supported by local staff from the post office . the scottish borders are under attack : there are far too many windfarms , solar farms , battery energy storage units and pylons . the borders is a beautiful place to live and visit , but that beautiful landscape is being blighted by new energy infrastructure . i have been leading a campaign against these developments , and we formed a group called action against pylons scottish borders to lead the campaign in our local communities . i particularly pay tribute to the outgoing chair of the group , rosi lister , for all her work in getting it up and running , and for her support in leading this campaign . i also thank the dozens of other residents who have supported this cause . one of the big , controversial stories in the scottish borders in recent months has been the scottish borders council ’s attempts to shut or mothball several nurseries . local residents were quite rightly furious about the council ’s initial proposals . the decision was wrong and needed to be reversed . i met so many parents who were concerned that their young children would be forced to travel long distances to go to nursery . many other parents were going to be forced to give up work , simply to look after their kids . it was a disgrace that the council was ignoring the views of so many parents and families across the borders , but i am pleased that the council rightly saw sense and is reviewing the decision . to make matters worse , the council is now considering a consultant ’s report on closing further public services , such as libraries , swimming pools and leisure centres . i am completely against most of those proposals , and will continue to campaign against them . i pay tribute to volunteers across the scottish borders . i started my “ volunteer of the year ” awards to celebrate the many dedicated and selfless people in the borders who do whatever they can to help others . i received hundreds of entries , and it is hard to choose who to award , but i will mention a few . kyle mckinlay , who coaches young teams at tweedbank thistle football club , is making a big difference in his community . david shepherd is involved in organisations including presenting coldstream , coldstream football club and coldstream bowling club . there are also all the volunteers at lavender touch in galashiels , who provide incredible support to people living with cancer and their loved ones . their work and support make incredibly difficult times for people a little bit easier . finally , i pay tribute to kelso cyclist oscar onley , who at the age of 22 is competing in the tour de france as we speak . he is truly an inspiration to many young cyclists , not only in the borders but across scotland and all parts of the united kingdom . i have fond memories of oscar , because when i was training to do my ironman back in 2014 , he , at the age of 11 , showed me how to cycle up some of the very steep hills in the scottish borders . even at that young age , he demonstrated mastery , and what a great cycling talent he was going to be . i am sure he has a fantastic cycling career ahead of him . i wish him well in the tour de france over the coming days , and with his future cycling career . as we rise for the summer recess , i want to take a moment to reflect on the real work happening back home in warrington south in our schools , our community spaces , our hospitals and our homes . parliament may not be sitting much longer , but that does not stop the work at home to deliver the change that our communities voted for last year . in recent weeks , i have visited schools and education programmes for children and young people , including evelyn street and willow green , and i have had the pleasure of welcoming pupils from st philip and barrow hall to parliament . every conversation i have had with teachers , parents and education staff comes back to the same message : we need to get inclusive education right from the start . that means making sure that children with additional needs can access the right support early , and that specialist child and adolescent mental health services are not a postcode lottery . as chair of the all - party parliamentary group on inclusion and nurture in education , and as an officer of the appg on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder , i see the national picture . in warrington , i see the issues every day in the families i speak to , the schools i visit , and the casework that comes through my inbox . i hear from families who are doing everything they can , and teachers who are going the extra mile , but too often they do not have the right support or specialist provision for their young people . at the heart of everything i do is the simple belief that every child , every family and every constituent should feel safe , seen and supported . that is why i have backed the government ’s plan to expand free school meals to every child whose family receives universal credit — a change that will support thousands of families across warrington south . with new , free breakfast clubs on the way for every primary school , we are taking real steps to ensure that no child starts the day hungry . that is practical , compassionate and reflects something i hear time and again from parents and teachers alike : children learn best when they are fed , focused and ready to learn . while i am glad to see the government moving in the right direction , there is still a way to go . i will keep fighting for a system that works for every child , not just the lucky few . inclusion does not end at the school gate ; it extends to places where communities come together , such as our local leisure centres . broomfields in appleton is a much - loved facility that plays a vital role in keeping people active , connected and healthy , but it is ageing and needs serious investment . if we are serious about public health , we must invest in the everyday spaces that make it possible , and repair and refurbish leisure centres like broomfields . we have seen what is possible when local facilities get the investment they need . in bewsey and dallam , we now have a proper community hub — a space that i was proud to help bring forward . let me be clear : places like broomfields deserve that same level of care , investment and attention . when it comes to services and infrastructure , our local hospital matters , but after 14 years of under - investment , my constituents are being let down by a system that is struggling to keep up with demand . in the past , false promises were made . i refuse to do that ; i want to be honest with my constituents about the situation we find ourselves in . securing a brand - new hospital is a complex , long - term challenge . many of the hospitals in the government ’s new hospital programme that are ahead of us in the queue are not expected to be completed until well into the next decade , so it is clear that this problem will not be solved overnight . warrington deserves a new hospital ; that is why my hon . friend at the same time , we have a duty to act now to tackle the immediate pressures facing our local health services , and to make a difference where we can . that is why , a few months ago , at prime minister ’s questions , i made the case for a new urgent treatment centre in warrington . since then , i have had a meeting with the health secretary to set out just how transformational that project could be for our town . the plan is practical and ready to go , and has been designed to ease pressure on a&e and improve access to urgent care for residents . it is now with nhs england . i thank everyone involved , especially our brilliant nhs teams , including nik and lucy , for their vision , dedication and tireless commitment to improving healthcare in warrington . the focus on practical , local solutions does not stop with the hospital ; it carries through to the everyday support being delivered in our neighbourhoods . just down the road , the bread and butter thing at dallam continues to support families with dignity and care , and in bewsey , the community shop , which i helped to open , has become a lifeline , offering affordable food and a welcoming space at the heart of the neighbourhood . flooding causes real worry in parts of warrington south . on new year ’s day , i was out supporting residents , directly helping people find alternative accommodation , delivering hot meals when the power was out , and launching a fundraiser to support families . the impact of the flooding was devastating , and for many , the recovery is ongoing . residents of sankey bridges , penketh , dallam and bewsey know all too well what it means to live with the constant risk of flooding . that is why i have worked hard to secure over £ 2 million in additional funding to move the sankey brook flood risk management scheme into its design phase , and why i will keep fighting for that important scheme . as parliament rises for the summer , the work continues . for me , being an mp is not just about what happens in this chamber , but about the conversations on the doorstep , the support we offer in moments of crisis , and the changes we fight for every single day . i will keep showing up , listening and doing everything i can to make sure that warrington south gets the future it deserves . thank you , mr deputy speaker , for calling me to speak in this summer adjournment debate , fittingly named after my dear friend and colleague , the late sir david amess . however , it is with regret and sadness that i feel the need to draw to the attention of the house the way in which sir david ’s family has been continuously mistreated . as i have said time and again , including at prime minister ’s questions , there must be a statutory public inquiry into what happened to david . last march , the amess family met the prime minister and the home secretary at no . 10 downing street , supported by their former mp anna firth , who continues to do commendable work for the family and their campaign for justice . as many have noted , particularly my right hon . friend the prime minister , the home secretary and , indeed , lord anderson , promised to keep the grieving amess family front and centre of the process . the family were meant to have a guiding — indeed , a leading — role , but that did not happen . instead , they were kept to the sidelines , and were not treated as being in a unique position ; and the media received information before they did . the treatment of the amess family has been simply outrageous . the process should have been followed more diligently , and the amess family should have been treated with significantly greater dignity . having lost their father and husband , who was a wonderful friend to us all , the amess family should have been first , not last , in the pecking order . his majesty ’s government should show some more respect for the memory of our late dear colleague , and as i have said before , there must now be a full public inquiry , not only matching the government ’s words with appropriate action , but ensuring that lessons are learned . from the government , we must see an urgent effort to establish the full facts , learn the full lessons from the failings of prevent , and determine what will be done in future to avoid a repeat of such a crime against this house and , indeed , democracy . as members will know , i am proud of being from the county of essex , as indeed was sir david amess , and if i may , i will take a few moments to say this : romford is essex and havering is essex , but we have been denied the right to play any part in the discussions about essex devolution . essex is our county . it is our historic county . romford and havering are geographically tied to the people of essex , yet we are forced against our wishes to be under the artificial construct called greater london . i hope that , even at this late stage , the government will relook at this and give the people of romford and havering a chance to have a different form of local government so that we can focus on what is best for our borough of havering and rekindle the links to our historic county of essex . i ask all members to look at the wonderful historic county flags on display in parliament square . what a wonderful display it is of the fantastic historic counties of the united kingdom , in which the essex flag is the most prominent . it is a pleasure to be able to speak in this afternoon ’s debate . may i pay a heartfelt tribute to sir david amess ? he was a wonderful man . i also pay tribute to ian gow mp for his vital work earlier in the history of this country . i am very proud of our town , and want to speak about reading and in particular my constituency of reading central . it is a new constituency , although it covers almost exactly the same territory that the reading constituency covered in the 1950s , so there is some history there . it is very much focused in the town centre and the nearby parts of the town . we have had a year of contrasts , and i want to raise a few important points about my constituency and thank many local people for their work in our community . it is vital that i start with the recent developments at reading football club . i say an enormous thank you to rob couhig for buying the club and helping us out of the terrible trough that we were in . i also thank the government for their work , including previous cross - party work , on the football governance bill , an important piece of legislation that i believe will prevent any other english club from suffering the dreadful fate that reading suffered for five years under an irresponsible owner who threatened its very future . i want to thank not only the new owner but the players and fans of reading who have been through an unimaginable time . it is with great pride that we support our club and we look forward to a better season in the new football season later this year . i appreciate the pressure on time this afternoon , so i will try to focus my remarks on a few other key issues in our community . one other vital issue for many of my residents , and for me , is the future of reading jail . this wonderful historic building , which dates back to the 1850s , has been left empty for some years , and i have campaigned for some time , as many colleagues may know , for it to be turned into an arts and heritage hub in memory of oscar wilde , who was incarcerated there . it would be the most incredible facility for our town , bringing new opportunities in the arts and heritage to reading . indeed , it would also encourage tourism to the town , given that we are the western terminus of the elizabeth line and very close to not only london but cities such as oxford and bristol . i am pleased that the jail was bought by a sympathetic developer , and i look forward to a successful tender exercise for a new architect and further planning work being carried out . i am also pleased that in the interim , the jail is being used for filming . if anyone watches crime thrillers , they may notice that some prison interior shots are filmed in reading jail . that is an indication of just how wonderful the site could be . back in 2014 , there was an incredible exhibition at the jail run by the charity artangel , in which individual cells were used for installation art , and oscar wilde ’s poetry was read in the prison chapel . it was an incredibly moving experience . one member of the arts world from london was talking on his phone in front of me as we walked down one of the cast - iron walkways , which looked like something straight out of “ porridge ” , and he said the wonderful words , “ i ’m in reading . it ’s really rather good . ” i hope that more people can appreciate our town and understand how really rather good we are . i would like to briefly celebrate our rivers and wonderful green spaces . there was some great news yesterday from the environment secretary about action to tackle pollution in rivers , a huge issue locally in both the thames and the kennet , a major tributary , and other watercourses such as holy brook , which have been polluted shockingly in recent years . we have also suffered from flooding . however , there is great news of important improvements to parks and riverside spaces led by reading borough council and in partnership with many other community organisations . i am aware that i have limited time , but i would like to briefly plug other local heritage , including the restoration of cemetery arch , a historic landmark in reading . i pay tribute to our dear friend nick cooksey , who sadly passed away , who had been leading the project brilliantly . i look forward to further work on the project . i thank our wonderful voluntary groups and our many small businesses that make us such a vibrant town and the major shopping centre for southern england . i am grateful for the new investment in the town at station hill where nearly £ 1 billion has been spent renovating the area and improving it dramatically , with a super new tower full of business accommodation and several new large blocks of flats in the area , which was once home to a car park . i want to celebrate our public services , particularly our nhs , schools and police , who do such a wonderful job . i conclude by thanking you , mr deputy speaker , for the opportunity to speak , and i once again pay tribute to sir david . this is a wonderful tradition , and i am proud to have contributed . it is a pleasure to follow my constituency neighbour it has been a pleasure to represent over the past year my constituents of henley and thame . it has been pleasing to back some local campaigns , but also to learn some of the national significance that those campaigns have , and i would like to speak to two of them . in my hometown of henley , i have been campaigning to get marsh lock horse bridge reopened since it closed over three years ago . there had been a record of inaction , and when i became the mp , i immediately wrote to ministers , the environment agency , thames path national trail and many other organisations — basically , anyone who would listen . i am pleased that that work has made progress . in doing that work , i have discovered a lot more about the state of our infrastructure on our rivers — that is , locks , weirs and bridges . we all know the state of infrastructure when it comes to education , health and our roads , but lesser known is the poor state of our locks , weirs and bridges . they are essential infrastructure for river navigation and safety on the river , and if we did not have them , my hometown of henley pretty much would not exist and would not have a river running through it — or at least there would not be any water in it . i would like to highlight that situation and call on ministers to continue looking at how additional funding can be raised for the environment agency and its vital work there . the second campaign i have been focusing on is the thame to haddenham greenway . thame and the village of haddenham are just three miles apart . haddenham has the train station , and thame is the major town with shops , schools and many facilities . the two are not connected by an off - road greenway capable of taking active travel . i have been campaigning alongside residents to get that going . that is why i introduced an amendment on compulsory purchase orders to the planning and infrastructure bill . as we know , compulsory purchase orders are readily used for road projects , but they are difficult to use for active travel projects . that is why i called for government guidance on that . unfortunately , my amendment was not successful , but i am pleased that active travel england will bring forward guidance , including two case studies on how other councils have successfully used cpos . i am grateful to the government for pushing that forward . a cycleway between goring and wallingford would also benefit my community . again , i hope that the government will continue to invest in active travel . i will touch briefly on another issue that i have been campaigning on : the lack of adhd services in oxfordshire . with no adult service commissioned for annual reviews by a specialist , once someone with adhd who is well controlled on medication reaches the one - year limit , as required by national institute for health and care excellence guidelines , gps are removing prescriptions from them . that is an absolutely scandalous and very dangerous situation for people with adhd . i urge the government to move quickly in their task of implementing the recommendations of the forthcoming taskforce publication , to ensure that we are properly treating and looking after people with adhd . in my remaining time , i will mention some of the excellent organisations that i have had the pleasure of meeting , including the men ’s shed in peppard ; the sharing life trust in thame , which does excellent work as a food bank ; the river thame conservation trust ; the riverside counselling service ; and the henley ymca . like many first - time mps who spent their summer recruiting officers and doing a lot of admin , i am very much looking forward to this recess , as i am sure all members are . but rest assured that i and my lib dem colleagues will be back in september to continue holding the government and the official opposition to account , and i look forward — order . i call jodie gosling . i join colleagues in paying tribute to sir david amess , a true champion of his constituency . with that inspiration in mind , and with the summer recess ahead , i want to celebrate just a few of the incredible people and the progress made in nuneaton . nuneaton has the proud legacy of hosting the first legal lionesses game , so i will start with football . just over a year ago , our football team , nuneaton town fc , had no home , no team and no committee , yet this year they have managed to top the league , achieving promotion with 121 goals . i thank the board , the fans , ministers and the football foundation for their support . i look forward to bringing our club back home . this past year has shown me the enormous heart and talent of my town . i commend those who supported the george eliot hospital through the mayor ’s appeal . it raised £ 46,000 , which was presented by mayor bill hancox and alderwoman sheila hancox earlier this year . the breast cancer unit will now hopefully move into a new diagnostics centre to continue supporting health in our communities . i thank the dedicated staff at george eliot hospital , especially annette tracey , who retired after 51 years in the nhs , including 45 years in the breast cancer unit . their work has reduced waiting lists and improved care not only across nuneaton but across our country . mary ann evans hospice remains a pillar of our community . it is the proud legacy and final resting place of one of my predecessors , the honourable bill olner . i join my hon . friend i am proud that nuneaton and bedworth elected its first nepalese - gurkha mayor , councillor bhim saru , who is a strong advocate for st mary ’s ward and the gurkha community as a whole . around nuneaton , we are making good progress on improving job prospects . this year i have visited many businesses , schools and training institutes . hercules construction academy trained more than 1,000 apprentices last month . north warwickshire and south leicestershire college ’s supported internships are breaking down barriers for disabled people to access good work , and it was a privilege to revisit four of those interns who are now in good work and thriving , their confidence booming . it was an honour to hold the first send parliament earlier this year and to see how the government can support the expansion of these schemes . this year , we held our first nuneaton sports and activities festival , which was a great success , showcasing the role of sports in community cohesion and improving health and wellbeing . clubs like nuneaton rugby football club and nuneaton taekwon - do are thriving , with nuneaton ’s george wright winning bronze at the 2024 european championships . like most post - industrial towns , nuneaton has seen its challenges , but our town centre is now transforming . new college buildings , a food hall , retail units and a leisure hub are nearing completion . the business improvement district is thriving and jumping into action with new wardens and a packed schedule of summer events . we still have issues with crime and antisocial behaviour , which are being tackled by the brilliant officers at nuneaton and bedworth borough council , in conjunction with councillor nicky king and warwickshire police . we are seeing the return of designated town centre officers and a summer crime blitz to make nuneaton the proud place we all need to see . it has been an honour to serve nuneaton this year . in the key areas of jobs , health , education and crime , we are making real progress . i look forward to continuing this work and rebuilding our thriving , proud town . i thank my team and the house staff who support members for all their work , which makes it possible to make the change we were put here to make . i wish them a restful , peaceful and safe break . it is a pleasure to speak in the sir david amess summer adjournment debate , which is one of my favourite debates of the year , because it gives all parliamentarians the opportunity to talk about the fantastic places and communities we represent . we are blessed to have an excellent network of charities in keighley and ilkley tackling mental health issues . andy ’s man club , nebula girls ’ group , aware and missing peace wellbeing and support all do fantastic work . i was privileged to host them recently at a mental health forum in ilkley alongside dr caroline rayment , where we brought together a range of stakeholders to talk about the challenges facing younger people . i thank dr laura spells , who came along to give hugely compelling and deeply worrying evidence about the damage that smartphones are doing to our young people . i look forward to continuing to work with dr caroline rayment and those stakeholders to tackle the mental health challenges facing our young people . in keighley and ilkley , we like to do things properly . that is why just last weekend it was excellent to attend two standout shows from both ends of the musical spectrum . beat - herder is one of the highlights of the uk festival calendar , and it was fantastic to go along and support the independent show created by six lads from keighley . i want to say a huge thanks to jamie foxon and nick chambers for organising that event . at the other end of the spectrum , the bbc definitely has competition , because silsden proms on the farm was a roaring success for another year running . i pay tribute to stuart clarkson , william and eileen jowitt and their team of 10 volunteers who put that fantastic event together , raising money for sue ryder manorlands hospice and the silsden methodist church . i know that many who attended that fantastic music event visited olive & green and isherwoods butchers beforehand to ensure that their picnics were as good as they could be . i also attended the oxenhope straw race , which is in its 50th year . for those in the house who do not know about that event — crikey!—it is where everyone gets dressed up in fancy dress and runs down the worth valley , having a pint or two in the pubs along the way . the event has raised more than £ 500,000 for local charities across keighley and the wider worth valley . i commend robin wright and his team for the excellent work that they have done in bringing it together . let me say a huge well done to our local salvation army , whose victory programme teaches young people for free how to make cheap and nutritious food . i was lucky to meet some of them just this weekend ; i had a great chat with many of them about the challenges they face . i say a huge thank you to imogen stewart and her team for the work that they do alongside rachel to provide those teaching sessions for many people across keighley . it is vital to give young people the skills to stay on the right path , and that is why i want to say a huge thank you to switch hitters boxing club . i particularly thank jonny greenwood for getting it going in keighley . the club is doing excellent work . i attended it , but i did not get involved in the boxing sessions myself — i have confirmed that i will go back with my shorts on so that i can take part . i felt slightly intimidated by some of the lads from keighley in their boxing gear , but i will go back and give them some support , because sports clubs do a huge job in providing confidence to young people from across keighley . ilkley is lucky to be the official host of yorkshire day on i wish all members across the house a very happy recess . i hope that they will be out door knocking , speaking to as many constituents as possible and advocating as strongly as possible for the things that matter to them at a local level , as i will be . it is a great pleasure to speak in this summer adjournment debate and to remember the star of the show in years gone by , sir david amess , whose plaque sits behind us . i also remember today my dear late friend , jo cox . jo and i served together on the board of the labour women ’s network , and i often think of her . i know that we are significantly poorer in this place for the absence of her experience and her voice of real moral authority . i have to say something about the horrific situation in gaza . hon . members may know that i was there in april last year , in my former role as an aid worker . even as i have been sitting in this debate , i have had an update on my phone saying that 15 people have died of starvation there in the last 24 hours . since i heard that the israeli military is now attacking deir al - balah , i have been thinking of a lovely former colleague there who has a disabled daughter . where are they supposed to flee to ? the former israeli prime minister ehud olmert says that his country plans to set up a “ concentration camp ” in rafah . the noble baroness kennedy said just last week that genocide is taking place . the world must stop these atrocities . our government have taken important action , but more is desperately needed , and quickly . let me turn to my constituency . yesterday i had the great pleasure of attending the burntisland highland games , the second - oldest highland games in the world . it was a pleasure to join the parade behind the burntisland and district pipe band , to hear the chieftain declare the games open and to enjoy some of the fine highland dancing on display . i congratulate the games committee on a very fine event . i will continue to work on improving accessibility at burntisland train station — an issue that i have raised directly with both network rail and the secretary of state for transport . frankly , network rail needs to get on with it , because the community has been asking for an accessible station for many years and has waited for long enough . we need action to make kinghorn and cowdenbeath railway stations accessible too . in such a beautiful coastal constituency , the work of our lifeboats is hugely important . this year , kinghorn ’s royal national lifeboat institution lifeboat celebrates its diamond jubilee , and i take this opportunity to wish the crew and the committee enormous congratulations and to thank them for the lifesaving service they provide to our community . they have already responded to 70 shouts this year alone . sixty years of lifesaving service is an incredible achievement . turning to cowdenbeath , i congratulate cowdenbeath rotary club on its centenary , and draw attention to the wonderful mining plaque that was unveiled in brunton square on tuesday . that plaque commemorates cowdenbeath ’s proud mining history and the key role that the area played in powering our nation . of course , it also commemorates the miners who tragically lost their lives in the pits . over in kirkcaldy , i pay tribute to all those who played such a vital role in organising this year ’s inaugural lang toun fest . the work of all involved deserves recognition — they have given the town a cultural , musical , educational and artistic spring in its step in recent weeks , and i am already looking forward to next year ’s lang toun fest . i hope to work with all the organisations in kirkcaldy that i have mentioned as we provide input and ideas on regeneration to fife council , which will decide how to spend the chancellor ’s multimillion - pound investment through the new growth mission fund on kirkcaldy ’s town centre and seafront . i am hugely proud that our labour government recognise the potential of our town and are investing in our place and our people after years of snp and tory neglect . i have created a survey on my website that has already been signed by over 350 local residents , and over recess i will be holding meetings , surgeries , roundtables and pop - up events to hear more from constituents , businesses and community organisations about what they want to see . i will pass their views on to fife council . at the same time , i promise that i continue to press the treasury to secure as much funding as possible . i congratulate growing kirkcaldy on being nominated for a britain in bloom award for the best town or city centre — the only scottish town in that category . it makes our town more beautiful , and we will all be holding our breath on order . before i hand over to the chairman of ways and means , i would like to say that this will be my last session in the chair for the foreseeable future . i thank colleagues for the courtesy with which i have been treated , and thank you in particular for the tributes that you have paid to my friend david amess . david and i signed on the register on the same day when we came into the house . i am very grateful to you all . thank you , mr deputy speaker . i join the house in thanking you for your work as chair . it is an honour to speak in this debate , held in memory of sir david amess . his legacy reminds us what it is to be an mp — to show up and champion the concerns of the people we represent . that is the spirit i have carried with me throughout my first year as the member of parliament for the brand new seat of harpenden and berkhamsted . over this year , access to health and social care has remained one of the most pressing challenges . i have heard from a constituent in berkhamsted who faces an eight - month delay for their nhs appointment ; from katie from aldbury , an expectant mother who could not get an nhs dentist appointment within 50 miles ; and clare from harpenden , who cared for her mother with dementia while juggling newborn twins and has been pushed to the brink with little support . it was an honour to welcome the family of ed holderness , who sadly took his life at the age of 24 — they are campaigning on the importance of mental health care . locally , i congratulate organisations such as hector ’s house and youth talk on their work . we have seen movement on the nhs , which i welcome , but we urgently need proper reform , including prioritisation of mental health and social care work . as i have done throughout this year , i again urge the government to start cross - party talks on social care sooner rather than later . the environment demands equal attention . my constituency has four of the world ’s rare chalk streams , which are beautiful places — the ver , the bulbourne , the gade and the lea — yet markyate sewage treatment works has dumped sewage into the river ver for almost 5,000 hours in the past 12 months , and around 3,000 of those hours were non - stop . it was an honour to secure my first westminster hall debate on tackling sewage in chalk streams . i have met thames water to push for action on upgrading markyate ’s sewage works , and i welcomed the government ’s proposals yesterday . i look forward to meeting the relevant minister to see how those changes can be used to prioritise the upgrading of those sewage works . i thank organisations such as the ver valley society , the friends of the river bulbourne , sustainable st albans , ecoberko and sustainable tring , which will not let me stop campaigning on these important issues . moving on to our high streets and families , small businesses are still struggling , and as someone who grew up helping my mum on the shop floor , this issue is close to home . many businesses , such as temptation in berkhamsted , threads of harpenden and almar in tring , say that they are still struggling , and many are questioning how they can cope with the rise in employment costs , national insurance costs and rents , as well as other costs . they are struggling , and they are asking , “ will we stay open ? ” these businesses , as members from all parts of the house have said , are the lifeblood of our local communities . i urge the government to rethink some of those proposals and think about how we can support our high streets and small businesses . transport is a growing concern in my constituency . we have seen continued cuts to vital services , including to the x5 , which connects constituents across tring and berkhamsted . while i am pleased that the frequency of red eagle services has increased to every 30 minutes — we have worked hard with local campaigners — many communities remain isolated . i will continue that work , but we need more support from government . unfortunately , local authorities are struggling to deliver under the current financial constraints . hertfordshire county council recently outlined grave concerns about the fair funding review , which sees the council face a reduction of £ 45 million to £ 55 million in its grant . that is not just a budget squeeze , but a direct threat to those social services and transport services that are delivered to our communities . on a positive note , i have been excited about the work we have done on science , innovation and technology , especially closer to home . a safer screens tour has allowed me to bring the voice of young people to that work nationally . it was a real proud mp moment when , after i had visited and spoken to two of my local schools — ashlyns school and berkhamsted school — they decided to get together and students themselves wanted to campaign on online safety . i urge the government to listen to those calls for change . throughout the past year , my team and i have handled more than 10,000 pieces of casework . it is some of the most enriching work that we do . i have held more than 300 local meetings and raised questions and issues more than 500 times with the government . every one of those has been on behalf of residents of harpenden and berkhamsted . i thank colleagues across the house for their support , and i especially thank my team , who have helped deliver for local residents as i have found my feet in my first year as an mp . i hope that my time as an mp reflects the principles i put forward in my maiden speech : to be guided by the values of community , tolerance and perseverance . most importantly , i thank the community organisations that deliver for harpenden , berkhamsted , tring and my beautiful villages , including the harpenden trust , the swan youth project , open door , food banks , the harpenden money advice centre and many others . i wish everyone a fantastic recess as we go back to our constituencies to be refreshed for when we come back in september . rose — there are about 16 colleagues bobbing . for me to try to get them all in , i will have to reduce the speaking limit again to four minutes . it may reduce again . it is an honour to speak in this debate today . i pay tribute to sir david amess , who i never met but whose legacy and values live on . i start by marking norfolk day , which is taking place this sunday . it takes place on norfolk is not just a county of beauty and tourist charm ; it is the driest county in the country , even though it might not be the sunniest , although i might dispute that . we are not just a county of beauty and tourist charm ; we are also a county full of innovation and creativity . great things often arise quietly from norfolk , be that the first uk prime minister , robert walpole , our leading naval hero lord nelson , or julian of norwich , who is thought to be the first woman to write a book in english that has survived . many great things continue to come from norfolk , including alfie hewett , and lauren hemp , who will be playing this evening against italy for the lionesses . i am sure members will join me in sending them the best of luck as they progress in their campaign . we have an opportunity to maximise the potential of the county further through devolution , and i am pleased that norfolk is in the devolution priority programme . that , along with local government reorganisation , will enable us to attract more investment , secure more jobs and deliver better services for our residents . with limited time , i will turn to three constituency issues . i am very proud to represent norwich north . first , on health , many great things come from norfolk and norwich , as i have said , and that includes pioneering health research work . i recently hosted the university of east anglia in parliament to showcase its work on prostate cancer diagnosis . that could transform the lives of men around the world . norfolk and norwich university hospital is also leading a world - first drug trial to tackle endometriosis . women ’s health is a priority for me , so i am glad to see such pioneering work on my doorstep . however , we face many health challenges , and the most noticeable is dentistry . we have made some good progress so far , with 21,000 urgent extra appointments allocated to norfolk and waveney , but we must go ahead quickly with reform of the dental contract . i have been reassured by what my right hon . friend the health secretary has said about that . i have also been campaigning , along with other members , to secure a new dental school at the university of east anglia . i believe that ours is the only region without one , and it is desperately needed , so i hope to hear good news about that soon . i welcome the government ’s investment at the norfolk and norwich hospital and in local doctors ’ surgeries ; after 14 years of neglect , it was badly needed . i also thank everyone who joined our campaign to save the nhs walk - in centre in norwich , which was , unbelievably , once more under threat of closure . nhs bosses have listened , and have told my hon . friend secondly , i want to talk about housing . too many people in my constituency are struggling to get on the housing ladder , stuck on waiting lists or facing soaring rents . i therefore welcome the £ 34 million that the government have given our labour - led city council to unlock anglia square , a site that has needed investment for decades and will now be able to deliver many affordable homes and jobs . this comes alongside the welcome renters ’ rights bill , which will , among other things , end no - fault evictions . i hope that the planning and infrastructure bill will provide more ways in which to hold developers to their promise to provide community infrastructure . in two instances , play parks have not been delivered . thirdly , i want to say something about opportunity . in my constituency and many others , special educational needs present a huge challenge . i will keep pressing for the change that we need , including a new send school in angel road . i thank all the schools that have hosted me , and the children who have asked such excellent questions . we must ensure that every child has a good job after education . that is why i am so passionate about clean aviation and clean energy in our region . i do not have time to say much more . let me end by saying that i will keep fighting for the health , opportunities and homes that my constituents need , and by thanking my team and all my constituents for being so brilliant . i speak today in the tradition of using these debates to highlight issues facing constituents . sir david amess set a high bar in making the most of his opportunity to champion his constituents , and while we came from different political traditions , i respect the example that he set . let us start with road safety . over the last year , i have raised serious concerns about rural roads throughout my constituency . i have highlighted dangerous junctions on the a27 , and recently backed arlington parish council ’s campaign to improve safety on the rural roads around arlington and upper dicker . elsewhere , communities have been left to take matters into their own hands . those living along the c7 , which runs through kingston , rodmell , piddinghoe , southease , iford and swanborough , have raised more than £ 20,000 just to fund a feasibility study as part of the “ safer c7 ” campaign . the fact that communities are having to crowdfund for something as fundamental as road safety speaks volumes . it is a damning indictment of national government failure to deliver the infrastructure that our villages and rural communities need . let me now turn to the issue of housing and planning . housing remains one of the greatest pressures facing my community . too many families are stuck in temporary accommodation while genuinely affordable homes remain out of reach . in areas such as mine , we urgently need high - quality housing in which people can actually afford to live . at the same time , we see poor planning decisions and underused sites wasting precious opportunities . i have raised the case of talland parade in seaford directly with ministers as a prime example of what happens when developers are allowed to bank brownfield sites in town centres to the detriment of communities . i am hopeful that promised new powers in the planning and infrastructure bill will give local authorities the powers to act , at last , on cases such as this . we do need new homes , but they must come with the infrastructure to support them , along with proper consultation with local residents and a focus on affordability . i am glad that my local district council listened to local concerns , and chose not to include the eton new town proposal in its draft local plan . that was absolutely the right decision . speculative , large - scale developments of that kind , dropped into rural areas without proper infrastructure or consultation , do not serve our communities . meanwhile , villages such as ringmer are being bombarded with a constant stream of individual housing applications , with no investment in roads , schools or healthcare to match . that is not planning ; it is placing pressure on communities that are already at breaking point . transport provision is key to making planning decisions . i welcomed last week ’s news of a direct rail service from eastbourne to london bridge , via polegate , berwick , glynde , lewes and cooksbridge , which is a step in the right direction for rail connectivity across the south - east , but like many of my constituents in the area i was very unhappy to learn that it would not stop at plumpton . my constituents deserve better than to be left behind in major transport decisions , and i will be objecting to the rail operator , gtr , and to the department for transport in the strongest terms . finally , constituents regularly raise with me the ongoing and unacceptable closure of the west beach in newhaven — the only stretch of sandy beach in our area . even nearby coastal towns , such as the aforementioned and wonderous eastbourne , can not match up to our sandy stretch in newhaven . shut off by newhaven port & properties , which is partly controlled by the french authorities , this treasured local space has been out of bounds to residents for too long . i have engaged directly with those responsible to demand answers and to push for the beach to be reopened . this is not just about a stretch of sand ; it is about fairness , local pride , and the right of communities to enjoy what should be a shared public asset . generations of local families have memories of happy summers spent on that beach . they should not have to look back wistfully ; they should be able to return to it . we will keep fighting to reopen the west beach — enough is enough . none of these problems exists in isolation . the issues of road safety , gp access and housing all reveal a deeper failure of governance over many years . i will keep working with my local constituents , residents and campaign groups to get real change on the issues that matter , and to provide genuine representation for residents in seaford , newhaven , lewes , polegate and every village that i represent . a portion of southend west was represented by david amess , and i call the new mp for the area . it is not lost on me that i have huge shoes to fill in this place , as i stand here representing the constituency that was sir david amess ’s . i send my thoughts to his wife lady julia and all the family , and i hope that we can find a way to give them the answers that they need . this is my second year of contributing to the sir david amess summer adjournment debate , and the last year has gone so quickly , but the passage of time has not eroded the memory of sir david amess . many members on both sides of the house , and many people in my constituency , will never forget him . he is very much missed . in my constituency , tony martin , who runs the chalkwell lifeguards station , set up a temporary memorial to sir david , with lots of pictures from his life and his time in parliament . it was a fantastic temporary display , and i am delighted that over the last couple of months i have been able to work with lady julia and some of sir david ’s team to put in place a permanent display on the wall of the lifeguards station . i thank everybody who has been involved in that project . of course , one of sir david ’s legacies is that his death led to southend becoming a city . every city needs a cathedral , and i have been trying to get one , but it is proving difficult , because chelmsford has one and there can only be one per diocese . however , i am working with the bishop of bradwell to see what we can do about giving special recognition to the historic st mary ’s church , where sir david had his southend funeral . i hope that we can get this over the line and that i will get the support of the church commissioners in making it happen . i want quickly to recognise the charity trust links , based in my constituency , which turned 25 years old a couple of week ago . its chief executive officer matt king and its founder cheryl higgins have done absolutely fantastic work in transforming a derelict plot of land in westcliff into an outstanding project , which tackles loneliness and social isolation through a range of different activities . the staff there work on mental health as well — it is a true example of what the government want to do in moving from hospital to the community . we have been struck by two tragedies in southend over the last couple of weeks . i want to recognise the death of seven - year - old leonna ruka , who was killed by a falling tree in chalkwell park on this is the end of my first year as an mp , and it has been an absolute privilege and honour to serve the people of southend west and leigh . we have achieved a lot , and there is plenty more to come . i am looking forward to it , and i wish all members in this house a very happy and pleasant summer recess . it is an honour to contribute to the sir david amess summer adjournment debate . i shall limit myself to a topic that is very important for my constituency of ceredigion preseli : the future of coastal rural economies . i shall make the case for a renewed emphasis and focus on the redevelopment and regeneration of those economies , not least because that would go a long way to addressing the government ’s aspiration for growth across the united kingdom , but also because it would help address a demographic trend that already poses severe challenges for the provision of public services in those areas , and that , if left unarrested , could become critical . ceredigion preseli , like many other constituencies , has an ageing population . the trend is particularly pronounced in my constituency . according to the office for national statistics , if current trends continue , 30 % of the population of pembrokeshire and a third of the population of ceredigion will be older than 65 by the year 2040 , which is just 15 years away . i need not explain to hon . members just how challenging it will to not only maintain the vibrancy of our communities , but ensure effective provision of the wide range of public services that any civilised community and society expects . in a renewed emphasis , focus and perhaps even strategy on rural and coastal economies , the government would do well to recognise the importance of small businesses to these communities . in ceredigion preseli , some 81 % of our over 5,500 businesses are classified as small businesses , and have fewer than 50 employees . this is quite typical for rural areas , where small businesses — especially in the agricultural , hospitality , tourism and leisure sectors — drive the local economy . it would be very welcome if the government looked again at a policy that used to be in place . i was told yesterday by a former civil servant that back in the tony blair government , one stage in the development of any policy in whitehall was called rural - proofing — a consideration of the impact of the policy on rural contexts . if that had been reintroduced , i do not think we would have had the inheritance tax changes to agricultural property relief and business property relief , which are already causing great concern . according to a report by confederation of british industry economics , it is estimated that 55 % of family businesses and 49 % of farm businesses are cancelling proposed investment projects in anticipation of those changes . small businesses in rural and coastal areas need a little bit of hope and confidence from this government . rural - proofing as a stage in policy development , and a dedicated strategy for the redevelopment of rural areas , would go some way to restoring that faith . in the short time i have left , i will touch briefly on the importance of our higher education sector . universities and higher education institutions must play a critical role in any strategy for ensuring growth across every part of the united kingdom . in my constituency , some 3,300 jobs are supported by its universities — that is 10 % of all jobs — and it is a real concern that we hear so little about universities ’ current quandary . rose — order . i am trying my best to get everybody in , so the speaking limit is now three minutes . i wish to pay tribute to the late sir david amess . i did not have the privilege of meeting him , but his reputation clearly precedes him , as does that of the late jo cox . i am a member of the speaker ’s conference , and we are doing all we can to propose the changes needed , and get the culture shift required to deter and prevent the intimidation of candidates and elected officials at all levels , so that our precious democracy can thrive . that is particularly vital if we are to encourage young people to get involved in our political system . the doom mongers are wrong about our young people . far from being a problem , they are our greatest natural resource — one that is often under - utilised , and that we must unleash . i have tried to do this in my constituency , including by holding a “ pitch your policy ” event . young people pitched in one minute the one new policy idea or law change that they would bring in . there were then two minutes of questions from the audience , followed by a vote . some lacked confidence ; others came to the event straight from a basketball session — a good illustration of the fact that we need to go to the places where young people are , and listen . i took the winning idea to the chamber , where the leader of the house responded to it , and i thank her for that . we should bring the voices of young people into the corridors of power , because young people are genuinely interested in their communities , their lives , their country and definitely our world . they have excellent ideas to bring to the fore . they are going to inherit the future ; we had better encourage them to engage with politics , so that they can be the architects of that future , rather than merely existing in a world designed by generations past , who have , to put it politely , singularly failed to create a world of opportunity for all our young people . the voices of young people are not being heard enough ; the focus is all too often elsewhere . for example , we heard much noise about the alleged attack on pensioners by the government . if we zoomed out and looked down from outer space , we would see it is actually the younger generation who have been neglected by governments of all stripes . young people do not get a triple lock . they should . they are the generation for whom buying their own home is out of reach , and they have far less job security than previous generations . earlier in the week , in a social media video , i asked people to leave a comment saying what changes older generations would need to make for the younger generation to have more influence in politics and lead an empowered life . a. mccaslin said : “ we need the same opportunities that the generation before us had . they dismantled the ladder they used to build their lives and then told us to figure it out like they did . ” when people say to me , “ i do n’t do politics , ” my response is , “ well , politics does you . if you ’re not involved , you cede the ground to those who understand the power of politics . ” i have been proud to be part of a government who are rectifying that . finally , i want to say , in the limited time i have left , a thank you to all members of this house and all staff . they have shown newbies like me only support and kindness . i pay tribute to sir david amess . i wish to speak about a number of transport issues relating to my constituency . earlier this month , i had the pleasure of welcoming the rail minister to ashford , where we attended the opening of a new career and skills hub for southeastern . after the opening , i took the minister on a tour of ashford international station , and the part of the station left abandoned since eurostar decided in 2020 that international rail services would no longer stop at either ashford or ebbsfleet . those parts of the station stand ready for international passengers to use once again . it was great to have the noble lord hendy reiterate his and the government ’s support for our campaign to have international rail services return to kent . in my year in the house , the other transport issue i have raised just as regularly as the return of international rail to ashford is the deployment of operation brock on the m20 . i am sorry that it was necessary to present a petition to the house on the subject last week , on behalf of my constituents . it is hugely disappointing that kent county council and the kent and medway resilience forum have introduced operation brock once again , and that it will remain in force until at least the recent announcement that the dart charge will increase from september has disappointed many of my constituents . if we take that together with the tolls now in place for the blackwall and silvertown tunnels , the result is that all those routes will now cost more . we should , of course , encourage people to take public transport wherever we can , and i recognise that the charges are in place to manage traffic numbers . however , many of my constituents will have no option but to pay the increased charge , as they have only one route to work available to them . potholes are a blight on the roads in my constituency , just as they are in the constituencies of most members . it is wrong that , as a result of under - investment by the conservatives , our constituents have been expected to deal with the repercussions of poor roads and the maintenance backlog that has built up . i welcome the fact that the government are committing additional resources to fix this problem ; they are providing £ 500 million in extra funding for highway maintenance across the country this year , and kent county council will receive up to an additional £ 16 million . if those problems are to be fixed , there will of course need to be roadworks , but i plead on behalf of my constituents for much better co - ordination to ensure that any disruption is kept to a minimum . i conclude by thanking you , madam deputy speaker , as well as mr speaker , all my colleagues and the staff of this house . it is an honour to speak in my second sir david amess adjournment debate , and to speak of my constituency of carlisle and the incredible roman dig there that is rewriting our understanding of britain ’s ancient history . carlisle — or , as the romans called it , luguvalium — was no ordinary outpost . it was a strategic stronghold on the northern frontier of the roman empire , and served as a key military and logistical hub , guarding the western end of hadrian ’s wall and controlling movement between roman britain and the unconquered lands of caledonia . the city bore witness to the march of legions , the clash of cultures and the daily lives of soldiers , merchants and their families who lived on the edge of the empire . now , thanks to this dig , nearly 2,000 years later , we are uncovering their stories , one layer at a time . the roman dig at carlisle cricket club has revealed not just one of the most significant roman bathhouses ever discovered in britain , but the largest building on hadrian ’s wall , as well as evidence to suggest that the site may have hosted the roman emperor severus in his final years . since 2021 , this volunteer - led community excavation has unearthed more than 4,000 artefacts , from coins and pottery to tiny , delicate gemstones and huge carved stone heads . these finds tell us not just about roman engineering or military might , but about people — their habits , beliefs , luxuries and losses . carlisle ’s roman past is not a distant memory ; it is alive beneath our feet . it reminds us that history is about more than kings and battles — it is about communities , resilience and the enduring human spirit , which is exactly what we have heard about in all our communities this afternoon . i invite members to join me in thanking all the volunteers involved in the dig , led by the wonderful frank giecco from wardell armstrong , and all made possible thanks to funding from the government , cumberland council and the national lottery heritage fund . together , they are not just uncovering roman carlisle , but reminding us that we are but fleeting custodians of our communities , and that we should always treat that responsibility with the same pride and respect that sir david did . i join colleagues in remembering sir david amess . i want to acknowledge the death of my father - in - law last month . he was a wise , kind and decent man , and will be missed by us all . i am grateful to all colleagues for the kindness shown to me and my wife , although i do remain very , very cross that i was forced to travel back to this place to vote on the day that my father - in - law died . members who have been accused of criminal behaviour can vote by proxy , but people with dying relatives can not . that is off the mark . it is unacceptable , and it must change . it has been a privilege to serve the good people of newcastle - under - lyme over the past year . being the voice of our community in parliament is the honour of my life , and i am conscious of that responsibility every single day . in my maiden speech , i made tackling walley ’s quarry landfill site my no . 1 priority . we ran the cowboy operators out of town , secured the closure notice , and closed the place down . i am grateful to the environment agency for the work it has done in recent weeks to stabilise the situation . our focus must now be on the safe and secure restoration of the site . the special educational needs and disabilities crisis in staffordshire has been firmly on my agenda since the election . i have stood with , and up for , the parents and carers who must navigate a broken system every day to get their children and young people the support they need and deserve . fixing our roads has also been a real priority . that is why i launched my great potholes survey , empowering local people to help me hold the county council to account . we have seen action on lower milehouse lane in cross heath , pepper street in silverdale and dunkirk in the town centre , but we need much more . i hope that those on the county council , who seemingly watch lots of my speeches in the chamber , will listen to my call to use the money that this labour government have given them to get on with the job . the events in the middle east are unforgivable and inexplicable . the deaths of innocent women , men and children on our screens are beyond comprehension . i was raised to believe that actions have consequences , so i urge ministers to do whatever they can to hold the netanyahu regime to account , to ensure that this war ends and to recognise the state of palestine . a two - state solution requires two states . it is a simple as that . last week , i had the opportunity to attend one of keele university ’s graduation ceremonies . i send big congratulations to all the graduates and their families and pay tribute to professor trevor mcmillan , who is standing down as vice - chancellor . i wish him , his wife chris and their family well . i shall keep urging ministers over the next year to give real support to the coalfields regeneration trust . i have made this case before . the government have got a lot right , so let us get this right , too . we need justice for members of the british coal staff superannuation scheme as it is long , long overdue , and i urge my colleagues in government to get this matter over the line . we need more support for our ceramics industry in newcastle - under - lyme and staffordshire more broadly . i know from meeting my constituents in local businesses such as silverdale bathrooms that there is much more that we need to do . i will keep fighting for local jobs . fedex , which plans to cut 400 jobs , must change its mind . we can not lose jobs in our industrial heartlands to affluent communities in the south . i said to our farmers on saturday that i have their backs and remain their champion . happy recess , madam deputy speaker . although some people will be hoping for a summer that is hot , hot , hot , many workers will not be doing so , because , although we rightly have legal protections against the cold in the workplace , there is still no legal maximum for heat . i am pleased that ministers began a process with the health and safety executive in the spring to look at workplace temperatures , and i look forward to a timetable being set for a public consultation . maximum working temperatures , backed by law , are already standard practice in other countries such as spain and germany . but , to be clear , this is not just about stopping work when the sun shines , but about common - sense protections , such as ventilation , rest breaks , cooler uniforms and flexible hours . the climate is changing , and so too must our laws . let me turn to another summer matter . as we head into the summer recess , members across the house will no doubt be thinking about their summer reading lists — i am sure that you might have a few titles lined up yourself , madam deputy speaker . but how often do we stop to think about where those books are printed ? a quiet revolution is happening in the publishing industry . millions and millions of books are being printed in bedfordshire every single year , yet this has remained a really well - kept secret for some time . that is why i called on amazon to include the words , “ printed in dunstable ” in every book produced at its bedfordshire site . to make my point , i wrote a children ’s story myself , about a little book with an identity crisis — he does not know where he is from . he goes all around the country , from bristol in the south to aberdeen in scotland . like all good stories , it has a happy ending , because the local mp intervenes . i challenged amazon to make my story come true , and i am absolutely delighted to be able to tell the house today that , from this week , every book printed by amazon in dunstable will say just that — that it is printed in dunstable . that is a brilliant way to put the town and its people on the map . madam deputy speaker , whatever you and other members are reading in the next few weeks — whether it is a biography , a romance , or even a political thriller — i hope that you all have a great summer . it is a privilege to speak in this debate in memory of sir david amess . my home town of blackpool is full of character and resilience . its people are proud , its communities are close - knit and , despite facing more than a decade of neglect , we remain hopeful for the future . a person does not have to spend long in my constituency of blackpool south to feel the warmth and strength of our coastal spirit . but as the independent commission on neighbourhoods made clear in its recent report , our communities have been asked to bear more than their fair share of the country ’s hardship , and nowhere is that starker than in blackpool south , where we have 34 mission - critical neighbourhoods , which is more than any other constituency in the country . that represents nearly every part of our town , where 97.8 % of our population lives , including me and my family . i see the impact of this daily : the exhausted public services , the empty shop fronts , the health inequalities and the frustrations that many feel when they see new developments , new initiatives and new opportunities as being for someone else . i am proud that this government are working on a new child poverty strategy , which will benefit many of the young people in my constituency , but it must be backed by real , targeted action at a neighbourhood level . crime is also concentrated . over 40 % of all antisocial behaviour incidents in blackpool happen in just three areas . a 16 - year - old girl told me recently that everyone she knows in the claremont area carries a knife and is involved in drugs or gangs , and that it is nearly impossible not to get involved . she says : “ gangs make you feel like you have some sort of power . that ’s the way it is . that ’s blackpool . ” that is not the blackpool that i know and love . it is the result of communities being left behind and let down for too long . in areas where we have focused , however , we have seen progress . in the brunswick ward , thanks to the multi - agency youth asb working group there has been a 45 % drop in youth - related incidents . the same applies to health . research from the centre for coastal communities shows that young people in coastal towns such as blackpool suffer worse health outcomes on almost any measure . this is avoidable . thanks to local charities such as counselling in the community , young people are getting support every day . organisations like the blackpool boys and girls club already do vital work with our young people . this summer local boxing champion brian rose will be launching box park — a free summer boxing initiative in partnership with maverickstars to stop young people from engaging in asb in the summer . it is a free event and an initiative i will be taking part in . we all know where we need to focus and who needs the most help , and we know how to do it : by empowering these places , listening to communities and targeting support where it will have the greatest impact . blackpool south needs the government to invest in its future , because when blackpool succeeds , britain succeeds . it is a privilege to speak in this summer adjournment debate — named , of course , in honour of sir david amess . sir david understood the quiet power of back - bench mps in this house shining a light on issues that are all too often left in the shadows . in that same spirit , i rise to speak about ehlers - danlos syndrome — a group of rare inherited disorders that affect the body ’s connective tissue . though eds is officially recognised as affecting around one in 5,000 people globally , the figure is widely believed to be much higher due to misdiagnosis and under - recognition . in the uk it is thought that around 460 people in every constituency are living with eds , yet it remains one of the most misdiagnosed and neglected conditions in our healthcare system . one of those 460 people in my constituency is connor edwards . i had the chance to meet connor earlier this year , and his story has stayed with me ever since . a few years ago while mountain biking on cannock chase , he was bitten by a tick and developed lyme disease , but lyme was only part of the story . it turned out that connor also had eds — a condition that affects the collagen responsible for supporting skin , joints , blood vessels and internal organs . for people like connor , that can mean chronic dislocations , unbearable pain , neurological dysfunction and craniocervical instability , where the skull becomes unstable and begins to shift on the spine . as a result , connor ’s head no longer sits safely on his spine , and the instability is crushing vital areas like the brain stem and spinal cord . he lives with pain , frequent seizures and a level of disability that has robbed him of the life he once loved — fishing , mountain biking and simply going outside . he told me that he feels that his quality of life has been completely shattered . for a man , like me , in his early 30s to be in this position is heartbreaking . it should not be anybody ’s reality in a country as wealthy as ours . the nhs currently offers no treatment for cci , and it lacks both expertise and imaging capabilities — for example , the upright mris needed to diagnose this condition are not available on the nhs . connor is now crowdfunding £ 50,000 to travel to a specialist clinic in barcelona in the hope of receiving lifesaving surgery that will fuse his skull to his spine . connor is not alone . according to ehlers - danlos support uk , it takes patients up to 12 years to receive a diagnosis . access to specialists is patchy at best , and those with the means often turn to private care . those without the means suffer , deteriorate and navigate a system that does not see them . let us be clear : eds is not rare . it is rarely diagnosed . what begins as a physical health condition can quickly become a mental health crisis . a debate was held on eds back in may last year , but the members who spoke so powerfully that day never had the opportunity to meet with the then minister . that can not be where this conversation ends . i will be applying to the backbench business committee for a debate on eds , and i urge colleagues across the house to join me in this effort . let us make space for the connors in every constituency . this is not just about one young man in cannock . it is about everyone who is waiting not only for treatment but for someone to believe them . madam deputy speaker , may i wish you , all hon . members , and especially all parliamentary staff , a restful summer break ? i spent my youth in the grassroots music scene playing in bands and putting on shows with my friends . the music was rough , the gear rarely worked , and if we got one lonely punter who was not a family member turn up we considered that a win . the diy music scene was where my journey into politics began , in a hardcore punk band writing songs about our disenfranchisement from the world around us ; we were kids expressing ourselves with electric guitars and microphones . indeed , i often think how many colleagues in the house cut their political teeth in the debating chamber of the oxford union and others cut theirs on the floor of the trades union congress . i cut mine in a mosh pit , with a microphone in my hand and music in my heart , covered in other people ’s sweat and blowing out my vocal cords , screaming nonsense like , “ the nurse will rise . ” when i grew up , a band could release an album and go on tour in medium - sized venues . while they would not necessarily become rich , at least they were able to get by . today , though , with the proliferation of streaming services and the erosion of the value of ticket and merchandise sales , live acts can barely break even on music streams , and venues are closing . many acts operate in pay - to - play environments , losing money every time they play . while pay - to - play is indicative of a failing industry , its existence has long been true in small venues for small bands . but i understand that this year glastonbury was pay - to - play even for some of the biggest acts . indeed , the independent recently reported that one act had spent £ 80,000 of their own money on a glastonbury set while smaller acts were offered just £ 250 to play one of the smaller stages , and not even given enough tickets to cover the whole band . this is a deeply unsustainable system that freezes out all but those with the private means to pay their own way . it is killing our creativity . madam deputy speaker , have you noticed how in recent years there has been a rise in the number of solo artists and a decline in the number of bands ? in my view , the effect is born out of not only a change in music tastes , but simple economics . if a promoter is paying £ 100 to an act to play , a solo act takes home £ 100 while a five - piece act scrapes by with a measly £ 20 each . i had that experience personally — exactly , in fact , the one time that my band were paid anything for a gig — and it did not even cover our train tickets to the city we played in . as colleagues look forward to the summer recess , i would like to make a request of everyone . please go and see a band this summer , preferably in a small venue , and preferably a band you have never heard of . please buy some of their merchandise and tell them they were good , even if they were not — especially if they were not . without ellie dixon , there is no chappell roan . without not right there is no bikini kill , and without nurse joy there is no red hot chili peppers . please support the grassroots — it is everything . the coolest speech by far . how do i follow that ? it is an honour to speak in the david amess debate . i start by congratulating falmouth town council and source fm in my constituency for the opening of the resource project this weekend , which will bring community radio and a community café to everybody in falmouth . thank you and good luck to pendennis leisure and all those working for a pool for falmouth . we are trying to get money from the government grassroots fund and others , and we are looking for a public - private partnership . local to that are the docks in falmouth . we are looking to restore the falmouth freight rail line , which has been shut for 20 years , to take 77 lorries off the roads on each trip . in falmouth , we have the docks , pendennis yachts and falmouth harbour , which all have fantastic expansion plans . we are looking to access the ports fund to make that happen and bring those new jobs to the town . i am so pleased with what the government have achieved on water . a scheme was announced this morning to work on the combined sewer overflow at queen mary gardens between our two main beaches in falmouth — at last ! i congratulate campaigners including plastic free falmouth surfers against sewage and goonhavern primary school ’s eco club , who have worked so hard for this . i want to say a little about a group in my constituency who have worked together and formed a support group because they all have endometriosis . david amess was such a champion for people with endometriosis . we have been working to get training for healthcare workers in that area . as a co - operative party mp . i welcome community right to buy , which will be forthcoming in the english devolution and community empowerment bill . i have constituents wanting to rescue a methodist chapel and a pub in ponsanooth , and the ship inn in portloe . the funding source to go with that would be helpful . i look forward to that being announced . to continue the co - operative theme , i have been strongly supporting the st mawes community who have been trying to build affordable housing for their local community , which has been decimated by second homes . i thank alan macklin , who has also been involved in the homes for ukraine scheme in st mawes . falmouth and penryn welcome refugee families has been doing the same thing . i thank simon fann and the food banks in truro and in falmouth and penryn . i especially thank simon for making cornwall a living wage place , which is a fantastic initiative . i also thank the following organisations for helping their communities : the new beginning community association in malabar ; the friends of coosebean , the friends of daubuz moor and the friends of tregoniggie woodland , which have been bringing green spaces back to the heart of urban places ; and the truro loops campaign , which has been restoring active travel routes around truro . i am a new mp and many of those are very new projects . i hope to be able to stand here next year , the year after and the year after that and say , “ we got some of these things done . ” meur ras , madam deputy speaker . i start by paying tribute to sir david amess . i did not know him personally , but i am moved by the references to his life from across the house and particularly from the father of the house , this debate , in sir david ’s name , presents me with a fantastic opportunity to do something that i so rarely have the chance to do : talk about cornwall . first , i will speak of the immense opportunity that cornwall has in its future , recognised by the labour government . it is hard to overstate the economic and strategic value of cornwall ’s vast assets in renewable energy and critical minerals , which are both so clearly fundamental to our economic growth and net zero ambitions . in the uk , we import tin from as far afield as the democratic republic of the congo , china and australia , with all the damaging environmental impacts that come with such imports . yet in camborne and redruth , we sit on the third highest - grade tin deposits in the world , and there is plenty of it . that is not just a statistic ; it is a strategic national asset . we have tin , lithium , geothermal and ground source heat , but we are also blessed with the opportunities of offshore wind in the celtic sea , onshore wind , solar and tidal energy . from critical minerals extraction under the ground to wind energy off the coast , cornwall is ready to play its part in the new economy . the task is vast , but the prize is priceless : energy security , which reduces our dependence on volatile international markets ; climate action , which secures the materials we need for clean technologies ; and jobs and regeneration in our cornish , celtic communities , which will bring back high - quality employment to communities desperate to grasp those opportunities . reducing economic disparities between places comes hand in hand with bringing opportunity to people , not just raising skills but building communities where skills are rewarded . the renewable energy and critical minerals opportunities are not the only factors that make our land so distinct . our language , culture and heritage , as well as our economic potential , mark us out on this island . i want to ensure that our language , culture and distinctiveness are recognised , respected and reflected in decisions made at the heart of government . that includes getting a devolution deal that works for cornwall and that celebrates our national minority status . our language , culture and industrial mining heritage are not just things we do ; they are who we are , they are part of our landscape and identity , and they have helped define who we were , who we are and , i am certain , who we will be . i have defined what i strongly believe cornwall can be , but i want to briefly highlight the barriers that we face . in terms of health equality , we struggle with poor health outcomes and our remote coastal geography , and those health outcomes are connected to poor educational attainment . to that end , i encourage members to join my adjournment debate in september on government support for remote coastal communities . it is a pleasure to speak in this debate , which comes at a good time to take stock of my first year serving my constituents in this place . i am extremely grateful to the old hands for their sage advice ; however , there is one piece of advice i was given that i am happy to call out as the worst i have ever taken . “ do n’t rush into recruiting staff , ” they said . “ take some time to work out what you need . ” by last autumn , i was buried under so many emails that i thought i would never have time to sit in this chamber ever again . i therefore appeal to colleagues never to give that advice to new mps ever again . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear ! ” ] once my excellent staff were in place , they worked double hard to keep on top of the new inquiries and to clear the backlog , and i thank them . however , i should politely advise the man who regularly sends me an email that consists of little more than a daily express headline and a link , “ i am sorry , but we are unlikely to respond to all your emails . ” my constituency is an unusual one . it is one of the largest seats in the country , and it takes in the solway coast , parts of the lake district national park , two national landscapes , and villages on the outskirts of carlisle , penrith — one of the largest towns at about 15,000 — and seven or eight smaller towns , all very cumbrian , each very different and all pointing to different service centres . if i am honest , it is hard work making sure i visit all my towns and villages . my surgeries and visits take me all over the constituency , but at times it can feel like i am spreading myself very thin . i am sorry if some constituents feel like they do not see enough of me , but i assure them that i am at home in the constituency every week and i am grateful to those living there who reach out and invite me to their events . meeting cumbria young farmers and attending maryport carnival have been two of the highlights of my year . these are strange times politically . one would think that after securing such a huge majority at the last election , mps like me would be feeling quite upbeat . i am not . although i see a government grasping the nettle on a range of issues that appeared to be beyond the political palate of the last government and a desire to secure economic growth and rebalance how limited public money is spent for the better , and although i know that change takes time , i also see a public who are struggling and angry . when the public get angry , they reach out for forces that feed on that anger and have always fed on that anger . between the emails from those telling me i am complicit in the murder of palestinian children or the enabler of pakistani rape gangs , i receive emails pleading with me not to try and be more like reform and not to try to outdo right - wing populist rhetoric . while i appreciate the frustrations of those who send me those emails , they rarely suggest an alternative approach . well , here is mine . we accept that we live in a country that is broken . we acknowledge that there are people living in dire need of—[interruption . ] am i out of time ? no way ! i recently met a minister who was keen to stress to me that so soon after 14 years of conservative government , we must not forget that on these benches we are still the disruptors . i believe that that is a good lesson for all my hon . friends , especially those on the front bench . it is a privilege to contribute to the sir david amess debate . sir david proudly championed southend and its people , and it is in that spirit that i would like to speak about sunderland today . to start , mrs ann blakey , the retiring headteacher of st benet ’s roman catholic school in my constituency , has for 20 years worked with love at the heart of that fantastic , warm community school . she is adored by pupils , staff and parents alike , and i pay tribute to her today and wish her a very happy retirement . i also want to take this opportunity to thank all teachers across sunderland central for the work they have done for our young people this year , and to wish them a well - deserved summer break . i said in my maiden speech in october that sunderland was a city on the up . well , promise made , promise delivered . it feels like it was yesterday that we were at wembley watching tommy watson score the late winner in the play - off final , which means we are now on the eve of being back in the premier league . sunderland fans are spending the summer pondering all the big questions . with our embarrassment of riches , who will we start on the right wing ? when will chris rigg score his first premier league goal ? and how loudly will eliezer mayenda ’s views on sam fender echo around st james ’s park ? i know that the minister will not be able to answer all of those key questions , but i hope she will join me in wishing sunderland afc well for the new season and in celebrating the passing of the football governance act 2025 to protect the health of our national game , despite the shameful opposition of reform and conservative mps . since i was elected , my priority has been investing in sunderland . there is such a buzz around the city , with cranes in the sky , businesses announcing they are moving jobs to riverside sunderland , the new keel crossing opening and the women ’s rugby world cup . government decisions are bringing further investment , rebalancing council and nhs spending . i will continue to work publicly and privately to bring further investment into sunderland — in our neighbourhoods , in our music and creative industries and in our public services . one facility that has received investment , but that we have had incredible frustration with , is sunderland station . eighteen months after opening , the facilities still do not work , and it is simply not good enough . i eagerly await the work by northern and network rail to deliver the improvements they have assured me will be made so that the station becomes rather less like an empty warehouse and more like the vibrant hub that our city deserves . with that , i wish you , madam deputy speaker , all the house staff and colleagues a very happy summer recess . it is an honour to speak in this debate in memory of david amess . like jo cox , he was murdered in a previous parliament , and i know many hon . members miss his friendship deeply — may his memory be a blessing . bury st edmunds and stowmarket is a beautiful constituency . members will of course be aware that its namesake , st edmund , was until the 14th century the patron saint of england . he ruled east anglia between 855 and 869 ad until he was killed by viking raiders . they shot arrows into him until he bristled like a hedgehog , then cut off his head and threw it into the forest . however , when they found his head , it miraculously reattached to his body . this was one of his miracles . it is my hope that when we elect a mayor for east anglia next may , the new mayor will choose bury st edmunds as the site of his new office . since being elected , i have secured funding for the construction of the much - needed new west suffolk hospital and saved the marham park flyer and the 73 and 73a bus routes , as well as securing £ 9 million of additional funding for local buses . we have sorted out £ 11 million for the potholes , and station hill in bury st edmunds is no longer called pothole alley . we got funding to fix the gp surgery in ixworth , fixed the dangerous fishwick corner in thurston , and opened breakfast clubs in howard academy and the priory school . free breakfast clubs are particularly important . in stowmarket , we have the brilliant food museum , which is running an exhibition right now called “ school dinners ” . i visited last week with my hon . friend now we are about to break for our summer recess . all we new mps have been learning on the job and , as i have just discovered , i have more to learn than many . i wish all my new friends — all 649 of them — a wonderful summer recess and hope that everyone gets a good rest . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . it has been a privilege to speak in this debate honouring the legacy of sir david amess — an mp who tirelessly advocated for his constituents . i could feel how all colleagues who have spoken are also deeply passionate about their communities , and it is a privilege to be part of the debate . sir david amess ’s warm homes and energy conservation act 2000 was ahead of its time in recognising that action on energy poverty and environmental policy are two sides of the same coin . today , i want to speak in that same spirit about one of the defining challenges of our time : the climate and nature emergency . despite the suggestions from reform mps and some conservatives that policies on the environment are a waste of governmental time and money , residents from across my guildford constituency have spoken clearly , urgently and passionately about the crisis facing our environment . what is striking is not just how much people care , but how much they believe that the government are falling short . sixty - five per cent of surrey residents do not think the government are doing enough on climate and nature . polling by surrey county council ’s resident insight unit shows that climate change and environmental policy consistently rank in the top five public concerns , alongside healthcare and nhs privatisation . the determination to see action begins young , as was clear when my constituents from burpham primary school wrote to me recently about their concerns about deforestation and the heartbreaking loss of animals , birds and plants that comes with it . they understand that cutting down trees fuels global warming , destroys animal habitats and wipes out potential medical solutions that could one day save human lives . tormead school eco club wrote to me about the challenge of sewage pollution in our waterways — one of our country ’s most shameful current environmental failures . although i welcome the pledge to halve sewage pollution by 2030 , action is happening far too slowly , but collectively we can do better . community actions groups such as zero carbon guildford are doing the kind of work in my constituency that we should back at a national level . zero carbon , in work with the water rangers and the river wey trust , regularly tests our precious waterways to monitor sewage pollution . nearly 500 residents are trained in citizen science , nine water - testing hubs are now active , and a new community water lab has been opened , in partnership with the university of surrey in my constituency . that is proof that local people are not just waiting for change ; they are making it . but they should not have to do it alone . they tell me that they want the government to match their urgency . they want visible leadership on nature protection , tougher laws to stop sewage polluting our rivers , green spaces protected from poor planning decisions and support to make their homes warmer and cheaper to run . on that point , the evidence already shows that insulating and retrofitting homes could slash energy demand by the equivalent of six nuclear power stations . it could cut household bills by a quarter , save the nhs £ 1.5 billion a year , and prevent nearly 10,000 deaths caused by cold and damp housing annually . this is not just an environmental policy ; it is a health and cost of living policy , too . i say to colleagues across the house that if residents are that engaged and schoolchildren are that active , what excuse do we have not to act with a level of urgency matching theirs ? i will end by highlighting one of the most visible ways in which we can lead : by supporting sustainable transport . residents are asking for better , greener transport options . they want joined - up infrastructure that serves people , not just cars . that is why i am pushing for a new train station in guildford , and i am calling for the government ’s support to make that happen . guildford ’s residents have been waiting for more than a decade for a decision on that . given the major housing development taking place locally , the appetite among local businesses and residents for greener ways to travel , and the government ’s commitment to rail travel , i say simply that now is the time . let this summer recess not be a pause in our work but a call to action for when we return . let us deliver the cleaner air , safer streets and low - carbon transport systems that communities are calling for . if we do not act , we are not just failing future generations ; we are failing this one . i hope that we have the restorative recess that we all need , particularly those of us who have spent our first year in this place . i say an enormous thank you to all the staff across the house , whether they work for us or help to make the house function . without them , we would not be able to serve our residents in the way we do . i wish everyone a very good recess . i call the shadow minister . it is a great pleasure to close the sir david amess adjournment debate on behalf of his majesty ’s loyal opposition . although i did not have the privilege of knowing sir david personally , i have heard time and again from colleagues across the house about the warmth , generosity and conviction that defined him . he is remembered not only with great affection but with admiration for his tireless commitment to his constituents and the causes that he championed . his ability to weave so many of those causes into these end - of - term debates became something of a parliamentary tradition in itself — and stands as a lasting example of what it means to be a true local champion . that this debate now bears his name feels entirely fitting . it offers members the same opportunity that he so clearly valued to test ideas , highlight local concerns and give voice to the communities we represent . i have no doubt that sir david would have listened to today ’s contributions with great interest and enthusiasm . while we rightly pay tribute to sir david and reflect on his remarkable contribution to public life , we must also acknowledge the difficult but necessary questions surrounding the circumstances of his death , as many right hon . and hon . members have said . sir david ’s widow , lady julia , and their daughter , katie , who are with us today in the public gallery , have shown great strength in their efforts to ensure that meaningful lessons are learned . sir david ’s murderer had previously been referred to the prevent programme . yet despite that , he went on to commit an abhorrent act of violence . in the years since , other cases , such as those in reading and southport , have raised similar concerns , as individuals known to prevent were able to carry out attacks . those are not isolated incidents ; there is a pattern that warrants serious scrutiny , and the opposition would like to see a full public inquiry into prevent , bringing together those cases to understand what went wrong and how the system can be improved . the prevent programme is an essential part of our national security framework , but it must be effective to command public confidence . where there are systemic failings , we have a responsibility to address them . as the government will know , the amess family do not feel that the recently released lord anderson report alone delivers the whole truth , accountability or justice that is needed . it is imperative that a full public inquiry is commissioned , to learn the necessary lessons from the systemic issues that clearly exist . i take this opportunity to ask the government to commit to a full public inquiry into the failings of the prevent programme . i now move on to the fantastic contributions we have heard from members across the house in this final debate before we break up for the summer recess . my hon . friend the father of the house , my right hon . friend i thank “ politics at its best is about service , not spectacle ” — i will use that one . the hon . member talked about him and his team making 200 visits in their first year ; it has obviously been a very busy year for them . my right hon . friend i am keen to reference as many colleagues as possible , so i will speed up from a canter to a gallop . we have had fantastic contributions from the hon . members for cowdenbeath and kirkcaldy ( melanie ward ) , for harpenden and berkhamsted ( victoria collins ) , for norwich north ( alice macdonald ) , for lewes ( james maccleary ) , for southend west and leigh ( david burton - sampson ) , for rugby ( john slinger ) , for ashford ( sojan joseph ) and for carlisle ( ms minns ) . a really interesting point was raised , again inspired by sir david amess , about the fact that we are fleeting custodians of our constituencies . the service that sir david amess brought to this house over so many decades is a north star for us all to aim for . i express my condolences to we also heard many interesting contributions from the hon . members for dunstable and leighton buzzard ( alex mayer ) , for blackpool south ( chris webb ) and for erewash ( adam thompson)—i look forward to seeing videos hopefully emerging in the coming weeks and months of him rocking out in mosh pits . we heard from the hon . members for truro and falmouth ( jayne kirkham ) and for camborne and redruth ( perran moon ) , my neighbours in cornwall , which is the next county along from my constituency . we heard from the hon . members for penrith and solway ( markus campbell - savours ) , for sunderland central ( lewis atkinson ) and for bury st edmunds and stowmarket ( peter prinsley ) , who made a fantastic final contribution to the debate . the hon . member for bury st edmunds and stowmarket is a respected surgeon , and it has been really interesting to watch him bring forward health matters and enrich the debate in this chamber . before i close , i place on record my sincere thanks to all those who have supported us in this parliamentary year . i thank the house of commons staff , including the doorkeepers , the caterers , the clerks and the event co - ordinators . their professionalism and quiet dedication behind the scenes allow this place to function with such efficiency and dignity , and i hope that their work is never taken for granted . i am sure that all members from across the house will join me in showing their appreciation for everything that they do not just today , but every day . let me offer special congratulations to two members of the doorkeepers ’ team who work in members ’ lobby , holly jackson and vanessa chapman , who are soon to be married . i know the whole house will join me in wishing them every happiness as they begin their married life together . i have one final remark : i pay tribute to paul kehoe , who is in his 45th year of service to this house . just like david amess , that is a true north star for what public service looks like . that leaves me to wish you , madam deputy speaker , and all colleagues from across the house a very restful and happy summer recess . i look forward to seeing everyone again in the autumn . far too smooth . i call the minister . i am honoured to close this final debate of the term from the government dispatch box . as a government whip , i do not often have the opportunity to speak in this chamber , so it is a genuine privilege to be responding for the first time in this way . i am usually the one lurking just out of shot , muttering about speaking limits and timings , so standing here feels just a little risky . i promise i will not abuse that privilege — much , anyway . i am proud to be part of this parliament , which contains the largest number of women ever elected . we still have a way to go ; i am only the 479th female ever to be elected to this place , and it is striking to think that all those women who came before me would not even have filled this parliament . this debate has been reflective , respectful , and united by shared values . we have come together to remember what truly matters in public life , and in doing so , we honour the memory of sir david amess , a man whose life of service embodied the spirit of this place . he was a parliamentarian whose good humour and deep commitment to his constituents won him respect from all sides of the house . we have heard some powerful speeches , and i would like to pay tribute to some of them . i commend my hon . friend the father of the house , my hon . friend my hon . friend access to banking services and hubs formed a central part of the speech made by my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend equally passionate was my hon . friend i could go on . we have had fantastic contributions . i will be brief as i am conscious of time , but if you will indulge me , madam deputy speaker , there is only one way for a welsh member of parliament to close this debate , and that is by talking about wales . for the first time in a generation , wales has two labour governments , in cardiff and westminster , pulling in the same direction . i can tell members that it is making a difference . together we are rebuilding our economy , creating good jobs , driving down nhs waiting lists , and delivering the biggest investment in welsh rail—£445 million to connect our communities and open up opportunities , including in my constituency of cardiff north . when labour governs at both ends of the m4 , the priorities of the welsh people are not just heard , but delivered . that is the power of partnership . i did say i would not get too partisan , but the contrast is clear ; the tories and reform are fighting for the next clickbait headlines . i wonder what surprises we will hear over the summer recess . perhaps it will be the publication of reform ’s first fantasy novel , because that is the only place its funding calculations belong . perhaps we will have a tory leadership contest , because we have not had one of those yet this year . meanwhile , we are getting on with the job . we have delivered 4 million extra nhs appointments , recruited 3,000 extra police officers , established great british energy , recruited nearly 2,000 gps , stepped in to save british steel , secured a better deal for the workers of port talbot , brought forward a bill on employment rights , opened free breakfast clubs and banned bonuses for water bosses . wages have grown more in the first 10 months than in the last 10 years of the tory government . there is a lot done and a whole lot more still to do . that is the change we were elected on last year . as president obama once said : “ change will not come if we wait for some other person or some other time … we are the change that we seek . ” we know that in this place nothing would happen without the myriad people behind the scenes . i express my gratitude to the house staff , including the doorkeepers , the cleaners , the clerks , catering , security , broadcasting , hansard and those in visitor experience , as well as our staff and constituency teams . mine are sat up in the gallery today , so i thank them , as well as my mother , who is with them . i also thank the civil servants . all these people come together to help make this place function . i congratulate two of our wonderful doorkeepers , holly and vanessa , on their upcoming wedding . on behalf of the whole house , i wish them a long and happy marriage . of course , our thanks also go to you , madam deputy speaker , and to mr speaker and the other deputy speakers . as we rise for the summer recess , i offer my best wishes to all , and i hope that everyone will enjoy the best possible summer break . i call bob blackman to wind up the debate . we have had a wonderful debate , to which 38 back benchers have contributed , and we have also heard three excellent front - bench speeches . if i may say so , the house is , of course , rising for the summer recess . some people think that we are all going off on a long holiday . far from it : we will all be going back to our constituencies and doing work for our constituents , as is right and proper . we will be giving young people opportunities to serve with us , while we are given opportunities to see more of our constituents . however , i hope that everyone will have a well - earned rest and a proper break . i wish you , madam deputy speaker , and mr speaker and the other deputy speakers — and , indeed , the entirety of the staff who support us — a very happy recess . i hope we can use the opportunity this summer to do more of the work that needs to be done in this chamber and beyond to ensure that the house is fit and ready for the visitors who want to come and see the work that we do , but let us have a good recess , let us hope for a brighter future as a result , and let us look forward to coming back in the autumn , refreshed and ready for the political fight . order . as we know , the doorkeepers know and see everything , and i need to correct the record , because an error was made earlier by the shadow minister . paul kehoe has actually served here for 46 years , not 45 . let me briefly put on record that i miss david amess a lot . he would come into my office with a toasted teacake and a cup of tea and check that i was ok . it never occurred to me that i had to check that he was going to be ok in one of his surgeries . i thank the doorkeepers , the wonderful clerks , everyone in the speaker ’s office , and my fabulous team — in particular , pavlina aburn , alison dobson and abigail curry — who will keep me busy this summer , working in my constituency , just like all other members . question put and agreed to . resolved , that this house has considered matters to be raised before the forthcoming adjournment . this petition relates to the future of wingfield manor , and is presented in conjunction with derbyshire historic buildings trust . it has been signed by more than 3,000 residents of derbyshire , and states : the petition of residents of amber valley and the wider derbyshire area , declares that the future of wingfield manor should be conserved and that it should be made accessible to visitors once more ; notes that the ruin of wingfield manor is a scheduled monument on which the government of 1960 placed a guardianship order , recognising its historical significance ; further notes that the manor , built in the 15th century , is said to have inspired the architecture of hampton court and served as a backdrop to the infamous babington plot when its most famous resident , mary queen of scots , was imprisoned ; further declares that the manor has been under the care of english heritage but it is privately owned and soon to be put up for sale ; and further declares that this presents a unique opportunity which is currently on historic england ’s heritage at risk register . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to take immediate steps to secure the future of wingfield manor and ensure it is , once again , accessible to visitors and available for future generations to enjoy . and the petitioners remain , etc . [ p003102 ] i rise on behalf of residents of totnes to present a petition concerning the closure of leatside pharmacy , formerly based at leatside gp surgery , and i declare that i am a patient . since the closure , many residents have faced longer waiting times and struggled to obtain prescriptions and advice , and the surgery has been sorely impacted by the loss . a separate petition on change.org has gathered over 3,000 signatures , representing the strength of local feeling . both constituents and doctors have contacted me to express the urgent need for a pharmacy at the surgery to support its work and local health needs . the petition states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to work with nhs england to prioritise the reopening of a pharmacy at leatside gp surgery to ensure timely , accessible , and reliable pharmaceutical care for the residents of totnes . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of totnes , declares that the closure of the leatside pharmacy , located at the leatside gp surgery in totnes , has significantly impacted local access to essential nhs pharmacy services ; further declares that many residents — especially older people and those with mobility challenges — now face increased travel distances and longer waiting times to access prescriptions and pharmacy advice ; notes that ongoing issues with alternative local pharmacies have highlighted the urgent need to reopen the pharmacy at leatside gp surgery ; and notes separate online and paper petitions on the same issue have generated over 3000 signatures demonstrating local support for this campaign . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to work with nhs england to prioritise the reopening of a pharmacy at leatside gp surgery to ensure timely , accessible , and reliable pharmaceutical care for the residents of totnes . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p003103 ] i rise to present a petition concerning the uk government ’s relations with israel . it is joined by 354 signatures from a parallel petition collected by campaigners for palestine in york , who have had a presence in our city for the last 30 years , but never at a time when the scale of violations and barbaric acts against civilians , including children , has been so catastrophic . the petition recognises the genocide against the palestinians , which must end immediately . the petition states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to immediately cut off all military and economic relations with israel . and the petitioners remain , etc . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the united kingdom , declares that there is a genocide taking place in palestine . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to immediately cut off all military and economic relations with israel . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p003105 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(martin mccluskey . ) i am grateful for the opportunity to open this debate on a subject that i care deeply about . last changing places toilets enable anyone , regardless of their disability , to go to the shops , attend hospital appointments , enjoy community life , socialise and travel . many of us in this place and , indeed , across the uk take this basic necessity and right for granted every day . my friend denise deakin campaigned to get more changing places toilets 20 years ago , so it would be remiss of me not to mention her in this debate . over the weekend , i spoke to faye from talke and jane from burslem , in my constituency , and they told me that the difference such toilets make is life - changing . one said , “ for me and my family , it ’s the difference between living your life or closing down your world . ” does my hon . friend agree that we have to do all we can to enhance and get more of these facilities across the whole of the country ? absolutely . as i will turn to , i know that at first hand as the parent of a child with cerebral palsy . the growth of changing places means that it is making an impact , but the fact is that we need more of these toilets across the country . i commend the hon . gentleman for bringing forward this debate . i spoke to him beforehand to get an idea of what he was trying to achieve , and i want to congratulate him on his campaign — well done ! every one of us in our constituency wishes we had someone pushing as hard as he is with his campaign . i say that because in northern ireland we have only 1.4 changing places toilets per 100,000 people , which means we rank the second lowest in the uk after london . the hon . gentleman is doing so much here , and we have a lot to learn . some 7,000 people in northern ireland require additional room for assistance and support when using public restroom facilities . does the hon . gentleman agree that , given that this issue impacts thousands across the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland , we must ensure that enough changing places toilets are provided in all nations for all people with disabilities ? absolutely , and i thank the hon . member . as i will come on to say , we have seen such growth , particularly in central london , but that needs to be replicated across the united kingdom . access to a changing places toilet allows anyone , regardless of their access needs or disability , to use a toilet with dignity , privacy and hygienically . does my hon . friend agree that accessible toilets keep people out longer , encourage spending , make towns more inclusive , and are critical for retail , tourism and local growth ? when councils close them , disabled people and young families just stay at home . does he agree that it is short - sighted of the conservative council in north warwickshire to fail to fulfil its promise to reopen accessible toilets in atherstone town centre ? we need more changing places toilets up and down this country so that everyone , regardless of their ability or who their children are , can make the most of their days out . absolutely , and i thank my hon . friend for those comments . again , i will come on to talk about a toilet that was closed in my own constituency and the impact that has . i will try to make some progress for a moment . changing places toilets are specifically designed for people with profound and multiple disabilities and their carers , who need more space and equipment than a standard accessible toilet provides . the features include height - adjustable adult - sized changing benches , ceiling track hoists and space for multiple carers , ensuring a safe and dignified experience . the changing places consortium was established 20 years ago , as i have said , and at the heart of its campaign , which was initiated by the late loretto lambe , the founder and chief executive of pamis — promoting a more inclusive society — was the aim to ensure the growth of changing places across the country . i wish to pay tribute to the work of changing places staff and volunteers , led by jenny miller and karen hoe , and their vital support in ensuring this debate could be brought to the house . currently , the total number of active and registered changing places toilets is 2,609 spanning the uk and servicing leisure centres , city and town centres , shopping centres , venues , hospitals , transport hubs , stadiums and attractions . last year , 414 new changing places were installed across the uk , the highest number of annual registrations ever . i want to add a personal note of thanks to my hon . friend for being such an outstanding advocate for families such as ours . we share a strong union on that point . does he agree that it is not enough just to have a changing places facility , because it is also important for staff in those areas to have had training so that they know how to direct people to it ? i reflected on that the other weekend when we went to a splash park , having seen that it has a changing places facility , which was amazing . however , when we asked the person opening the café , who allowed us to go in , how we could access the changing places facility , they just did not know , which made it inaccessible . does he agree that it is so important that training is given to staff where there is a changing places facility , so that they can adequately direct people to it ? i agree absolutely with my hon . friend . we work very closely together on these issues , as parents of disabled children . i will turn to such training in relation to some of my own horror stories in due course . in may , pamis announced that it is updating its changing places practical guidance , a resource that helps support the design and management of changing places toilets . i think i missed out that there were 799 toilets 10 years ago , so there has been significant growth since that time . i should also note the changes made by the previous government when they amended the building regulations 2010 , under which it is now compulsory for some new large buildings to have changing places toilets installed in them . in addition , a changing places toilets fund of £ 30.5 million was made available in 2023 , which has provided 600 changing places across england . i have seen the real impact that that growth has had in london and the home counties as a south - east london mp . i see that now in central london , as compared with 10 years ago , in train stations , at cultural venues , along the south bank and , very recently , in oxford street . the need2change campaign , spearheaded by bromley resident katrina o’leary who i worked with before i was elected to this place , has allowed an increase in toilets in parks , hospitals and coastal towns to ensure her family , my family and other families can have the days out that others take for granted . i thank my hon . friend for giving way and i congratulate him on securing this important debate . it is typically human - focused , compassionate and decent , which sums him up in every way . will he join me in highlighting the current changing places toilets in newcastle - under - lyme at keele services on the m6 southbound , morrisons , the jubilee 2 gym and sports centre , and our local library ? that is four , but we need many more and government has an important role to play in making that happen . i thank my hon . friend . i absolutely agree . we have seen that growth , but we need to see more . i thank my hon . friend for giving way . i am very sad to report that there are no changing places toilets in my constituency on the website — not a single one . i believe that , actually , congleton leisure centre does have a changing places toilet , and i believe that ruby ’s fund also has a very extensive disabled - facilitated toilet , although not to changing places standard . does he agree that , when i have a constituency of 90,000 people , with four towns and multiple villages , that is an appalling state of affairs and we need to do better ? i thank my hon . friend . i am happy to work with her and her local authority to bring sites forward . i will now talk about my own family ’s experience and , in particular , about education . i fully accept that not every disability is visible . many people who may appear not to have a disability do require a changing places toilet , for instance if they have a colostomy bag and require extra space for toileting . for those who need a changing places toilet , the current system can be very frustrating . the main way of finding where one is located is through the excellent search location tool and map — this was just referred to — on the changing places website . there is a separate app , but it is not run by changing places — it is run by a third party — and so is not as up to date . the information on the changing places website can only be up to date if the provider of the toilet advises of any changes in availability . i could give a litany of experiences , as could my hon . friend there are occasions where , because the information has not been updated or because of a lack of training on what changing places toilets are , we have had some experiences that have been not so great : finding that the only changing places toilet in the place you are visiting has been closed because it is vandalised ; finding that the changing places toilet in a building is not available , as it is being used as a storage cupboard ; having a council staff member refuse someone , who clearly can not walk and is clearly in nappies , access to the changing places toilet on the grounds that they are a child and should therefore use a baby changing table , even when it is clear that their height , and particularly their weight , would break the table ; finding , because it is winter , that the council has closed the toilet entirely or , when visiting a busy coastal city , that it closes at 4 pm — because clearly disabled people do not need to use the toilet after 4 pm ! i have seen some terrible training of staff in train stations and in public buildings , where they do not understand what a changing places toilet is . on numerous occasions , i have been told that because my daughter is a wheelchair user she should use the standard disabled toilet , with no understanding that she can not stand and there is no hoist in a standard disabled toilet , and that if someone uses nappies , you might need a bed to change them . there was one occasion in a central london train station when a toilet attendant made everyone , regardless of which toilet they required , join one queue because their objective was reducing the queue length , rather than ensuring that the people who were able to use the only toilet available to them , did so . as we stood patiently at about number 50 in the queue , 49 people in front of us who did not need the changing places toilet were , in turn , directed to it . there are , however , some fantastic instances of staff ensuring that those trying to use these toilets as a baby changing room — which happens a lot — do not do so , and examples of fantastic signage explaining what a changing places toilet is intended for . along with the people who believe a changing places toilet is , in fact , a large baby changing facility , one other issue that can cause problems is the easy availability of radar keys , which are often purchased on the internet or in high street shops . i am afraid that some people do buy them as a way of skipping toilet queues . in a number of places , including in bexleyheath town centre in my constituency , the use of a radar key has led to people sleeping on the changing bed , and someone moving themselves and all their belongings into the toilet . my council took the decision to close the toilet because of the repeated damage caused by the person who kept moving into it , although i would argue that the council was clearly not maintaining it adequately , given that someone had been living in it for several weeks before my own wife discovered that they were living there . those issues persist , and we therefore need to have a conversation about training , about spreading best practice on signage and about different entry systems , which a number of changing places toilets now have . those things would greatly reduce the stress for those who genuinely need a changing places toilet . will my hon . friend give way ? very quickly — you have had your go already . [ laughter . ] i very much appreciate my hon . friend giving way again . does he agree that when you go somewhere and you are unable to access adequate facilities to change your child , the message that is sent to you and your family is , “ you are not welcome here . we do not want you . ” ? conversely , when you go somewhere that has a changing places facility , you feel welcomed and part of the community . that is absolutely the case . we will visit the same places for days out and we know our routine in central london , because we know where we will be welcomed and where we have had those bad experiences , which i have mentioned . we do , of course , also need to consider this place . we have a changing places toilet in the lower waiting hall , which is of the very old , original standard . it is therefore difficult to hoist somebody on to the bed , given how low the ceiling is . there is , however , no facility for visitors to portcullis house , which is something we need to consider going forward . in my constituency , there is one changing places toilet , located in the broadway shopping centre , but we need more . hall place would be a fantastic place to have one , given that it is the premier cultural attraction and open space in my constituency . there are four changing places toilets in my constituency , which , given that it is one of england ’s largest constituencies , still feels very inadequate . does my hon . friend agree that one sector where we would definitely benefit from more changing places toilets is in our visitor attractions ? does he support my call for english heritage to increase the number of changing places facilities on its estate ? i absolutely agree . as my hon . friend says , i am pretty sure that there are some in her constituency , but we do need to expand that . having those facilities on the south bank has made such an impact culturally , i can tell you , madam deputy speaker . we have just two changing places toilets in my constituency , which is semi - rural and quite large . one is at elvaston castle country park , so i ask my hon . friend to put that on his list of places to come and visit . i opened my constituency office only once i had a disabled access toilet , but it just feels like such a halfway house . does my hon . friend agree that two changing places toilets for a constituency as large as south derbyshire is far from adequate ? i absolutely agree with my hon . friend , who has one more than me in her constituency . we do need to expand the number that we have . i recently met members of my local bexley mencap , who raised with me the need for a changing places toilet in one of my borough ’s swimming pools . we have three swimming pools in my local authority area , and it can be very difficult for members to change themselves . however , campaigning can work . for many years , i have questioned the rationale of eurotunnel leshuttle having a changing places toilet in folkestone but not having one for the very same customers in calais . i accept that changing places toilets are very uncommon in france — in fact , i could count them on one hand . however , after many years of being told that one could not be provided in calais , i have been advised in the past month that one will be supplied , although eurotunnel is being vague about the installation date . those customers will now finally be able to use a changing places toilet on both legs of their journey . i know that my hon . friend my hon . friend i continue to aspire to see a national disability travel app that shows accessible train stations and interchanges , and flags up when lifts are out of order and where there is a changing places toilet . we must ensure that we do what we can to expand the provision of accessible toilets , particularly changing places toilets , to public buildings , parks and community facilities . i am very grateful to hon . members for their contributions this afternoon . i encourage them to engage with their local authorities and stakeholder groups , and impress on them the importance of changing places toilets so that all our constituents can have access to a clean , safe and accessible facility . thank you , madam deputy speaker , and i wish you a very happy summer recess . i am grateful to my hon . friend i am proud to have been a long - standing supporter of the changing places toilet campaign — long before my time in this parliament . i have never officially been the toilets minister , but i have spoken it into existence by telling anyone who will listen what i think . it is a simple truth that access to toilets — changing places in this case , and standard public facilities — is about dignity , independence , inclusion and ensuring that everyone , regardless of their needs , can fully participate in their community . no one , as my hon . friend the member for thurrock said , should ever get the message — explicitly or implicitly — that they are not welcome in their own community . we know that for many people , especially those with complex needs or health conditions , the lack of appropriate toilet provision can be the deciding factor in whether they leave the house , visit the town centre or spend time with friends and family in their community . without suitable facilities , what should be a normal day out can become a source of stress , exclusion and even risk , and we do not want that for anybody in our communities . that was the spirit not only of my hon . friend ’s speech , but of all the contributions from our colleagues . the ministry of housing , communities and local government has done remarkable work through the £ 30.5 million changing places toilet programme . i have in the past recognised the work of the previous prime minister in this space , and i would like to do so again . these facilities provide the equipment , the space and the security needed by more than 250,000 people across the uk — people for whom standard accessible toilets are simply not suitable for their needs . the fund has supported the installation of 483 new facilities across 220 local authority areas , and has been a jumping - off point for best practice guidance , mandatory technical design training to local authorities and operational training . i heard what my hon . friend the member for thurrock said about where that has fallen short . we note that and we will make sure that we are communicating as best we can to make sure that , where these valued facilities have been installed , they are accessible , because the people who work in those spaces can help in the appropriate way . my hon . friend the member for bexleyheath and crayford was right that investment has been targeted to address gaps where provision is limited or non - existent , particularly in rural towns and coastal communities . it is important to recognise the vital role that transport plays in supporting independence and inclusion , so it must overlap with this agenda . again , i acknowledge the important work of the department for transport , which has made available more than £ 2.5 million of funding to install changing places toilets at motorway service areas and railway stations across the country . my hon . friend the government ’s inclusive transport strategy commits us to improving accessibility and ensuring equal access to the transport network for disabled people by 2030 . my hon . friend the member for bexleyheath and crayford has made a very important suggestion about how that could be improved with a single integrated app . i would be keen to meet him to talk further about that , and i assure him that the same goes for my colleagues in the department for transport . the minister is talking about the importance of a single integrated app that would bring together accessible toilet facilities and transport . does he agree that we need this across the whole of the uk so that my constituents in fife and constituents in scotland can travel across the uk ? we are , after all , one country , and we need these facilities to be integrated and open to all our constituents . will he join me in congratulating my hon . friend on the second question , i absolutely will . my hon . friend ’s contribution to this debate was outstanding , as is his wider work . on the first point , as we begin summer recess , a great number of colleagues will be crossing national borders within the uk — in my case to west wales , but others will be going to scotland . it is important that people know where facilities are and that we have integration . i am always keen to work with my counterparts in the devolved governments , and i certainly would be keen to work with them on this issue . my hon . friends the members for congleton ( sarah russell ) , for carlisle ( ms minns ) and for south derbyshire ( samantha niblett ) , and all of us to some degree , have talked about a lack of provision in our communities , notwithstanding that there are now 2,600 changing places toilets . i hope to give a degree of succour , given the very important change that was made by the previous government , which i want to recognise . the important change in building regulations in january 2021 meant that new large public buildings , from shopping centres and arts venues to motorway services and sports stadiums , have to have these toilets in them . i can give confidence to colleagues that as developments take place , they will naturally get these facilities . that is really good news and a very important sign . it shows that although things such as building regulations might sound esoteric , if done thoughtfully and to reflect the lived experience of our communities , they can significantly improve quality of life for people across the country . that change will be coming . that is fantastic , but could the minister please think about how we can address this issue for those of us with predominantly rural communities that have smaller towns that are unlikely to have very large buildings ? i will take up that point in the same spirit . the intent of the original programme was to try to fill in the gaps , but clearly from my hon . friend ’s contribution there is more to do , so i will reflect on that and talk with colleagues . these changes do not happen by accident , so i want to recognise the tireless campaigning of individuals , charities such as muscular dystrophy uk , and local authorities , which have been progressive in this space . i would like to personally thank a very good friend of mine in nottingham , martin jackaman , who was at the very heart of this campaign at the beginning . it was he who introduced me to the importance of this issue was when i was a young portfolio holder on my council nearly 15 years ago . the action of such individuals has meant that progress has been made and that we can be confident of more progress to come . does my hon . friend agree that there is quite a large amount of ignorance among people who do not need to use these facilities , and that it is incumbent on all of us in this house , our councillor colleagues and others to raise awareness so that people do not just walk on by in towns , not realising the needs of others ? it is so important that in our naturally busy lives we all do not cut corners , whether by parking in places or using toilets that are not designed for us . we must understand that , when we do so , what may seem a pretty harmless — i suspect it is thoughtless — act could have a profound impact on an individual who needs those spaces that affects not only their day but whether in future they will be willing to venture into that amenity . i do not think anybody would want to have that impact . we must all reflect on the impacts we have and , therefore , on how we might mitigate them in the future and stop these things from happening . this has been an important debate . as we can see from the number of colleagues in the chamber , we could have done with much longer — there is certainly much more i would like to have said on public toilets — but i know that we will have such opportunities in the future . the progress that has been made so far is a result of really heroic individuals , campaigners and charities , and has happened because people have shared what are often some of the worst experiences of their and their families ’ lives . we are better for their willingness to do so . i want them to hear me say from the dispatch box that , yes , we want them to keep campaigning and fighting — that is what we will all do — and that in us they have a government who understand the issues they are talking about and want to be their partner in improving them . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . it is a pleasure to follow my constituency neighbour it has been a pleasure to represent over the past year my constituents of henley and thame . it has been pleasing to back some local campaigns , but also to learn some of the national significance that those campaigns have , and i would like to speak to two of them . in my hometown of henley , i have been campaigning to get marsh lock horse bridge reopened since it closed over three years ago . there had been a record of inaction , and when i became the mp , i immediately wrote to ministers , the environment agency , thames path national trail and many other organisations — basically , anyone who would listen . i am pleased that that work has made progress . in doing that work , i have discovered a lot more about the state of our infrastructure on our rivers — that is , locks , weirs and bridges . we all know the state of infrastructure when it comes to education , health and our roads , but lesser known is the poor state of our locks , weirs and bridges . they are essential infrastructure for river navigation and safety on the river , and if we did not have them , my hometown of henley pretty much would not exist and would not have a river running through it — or at least there would not be any water in it . i would like to highlight that situation and call on ministers to continue looking at how additional funding can be raised for the environment agency and its vital work there . the second campaign i have been focusing on is the thame to haddenham greenway . thame and the village of haddenham are just three miles apart . haddenham has the train station , and thame is the major town with shops , schools and many facilities . the two are not connected by an off - road greenway capable of taking active travel . i have been campaigning alongside residents to get that going . that is why i introduced an amendment on compulsory purchase orders to the planning and infrastructure bill . as we know , compulsory purchase orders are readily used for road projects , but they are difficult to use for active travel projects . that is why i called for government guidance on that . unfortunately , my amendment was not successful , but i am pleased that active travel england will bring forward guidance , including two case studies on how other councils have successfully used cpos . i am grateful to the government for pushing that forward . a cycleway between goring and wallingford would also benefit my community . again , i hope that the government will continue to invest in active travel . i will touch briefly on another issue that i have been campaigning on : the lack of adhd services in oxfordshire . with no adult service commissioned for annual reviews by a specialist , once someone with adhd who is well controlled on medication reaches the one - year limit , as required by national institute for health and care excellence guidelines , gps are removing prescriptions from them . that is an absolutely scandalous and very dangerous situation for people with adhd . i urge the government to move quickly in their task of implementing the recommendations of the forthcoming taskforce publication , to ensure that we are properly treating and looking after people with adhd . in my remaining time , i will mention some of the excellent organisations that i have had the pleasure of meeting , including the men ’s shed in peppard ; the sharing life trust in thame , which does excellent work as a food bank ; the river tame conservation trust ; the riverside counselling service ; and the henley ymca . like many first - time mps who spent their summer recruiting officers and doing a lot of admin , i am very much looking forward to this recess , as i am sure all members are . but rest assured that i and my lib dem colleagues will be back in september to continue holding the government and the official opposition to account , and i look forward — would it was so . my constituent scott young , a 34 - year - old father - to - be from beverley , was left permanently blind in one eye after nhs failures , including a two - month delay to urgent surgery following a diabetic haemorrhage , which the trust now blames on admin mistakes . when the same issue threatened his remaining sight , identical delays occurred until i intervened . yet the hull university teaching hospitals nhs trust response contained factual errors , including claiming that a heart condition delayed surgery even though it had not been diagnosed when the delay occurred . does the minister agree that such failings demand accountability , and what steps can he take to improve the administrative processes within our hospitals ?