ordered , that jo churchill and steve double be discharged from the committee of selection and joy morrissey and stuart anderson be added.—(mr marcus jones . ) the secretary of state was asked — whether he plans to take legislative steps to help end violence against women and girls . whether he plans to take legislative steps to help end violence against women and girls . whether he plans to take legislative steps to help end violence against women and girls . whether he plans to take legislative steps to help end violence against women and girls . what reforms he is making to the criminal justice system to tackle violence against women and girls . minister , welcome . thank you , mr speaker . since 2010 , this government have transformed the legislative landscape on tackling violence against women . we have created new criminal offences of stalking , non - fatal strangulation and coercive control , recognising that the most pernicious abuse is not always physical . we have implemented comprehensive modern slavery and domestic abuse laws , and outlawed insidious harms , such as revenge porn and the so - called “ rough sex ” defence to murder . we are prosecuting more rape cases today than in 2010 , with sentences that are about 50 % longer . but we are going further still , in our sentencing bill , our criminal justice bill and our victims and prisoners bill . i welcome the minister to her place . we need to be doing much more to tackle the culture of toxic masculinity that , sadly , still exists . we recently had a situation in midlothian where one of our councillors faced sexual harassment at a public event . when they complained and raised the issue , the perpetrator ’s colleagues simply said , “ but he ’s a good guy . ” . we need to do much more to tackle that sort of attitude . despite the complaint being made and the complainant being believed , no action was ever taken . what more can this government do to ensure that in these situations action is taken so that we protect women and girls from such unfortunate situations ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . i know that he does a lot of work on perpetrator programmes through the white ribbon scheme in scotland . i am sorry to hear about the experience of one of his local councillors , and i draw to his attention the protection from sex - based harassment in public act 2023 , which recently received royal assent . it creates an offence of intentional harassment carried out because of a person ’s sex . it is quite possible that that covers his friend ’s case , so i would be grateful if he wrote to me or came to see me to discuss it further . last month , sex matters presented the prime minister with a letter signed by almost 15,000 people asking him to “ take urgent action to halt an escalating campaign of violence and intimidation against women in the name of ‘ trans rights ’ . ” it details how women and , in particular , lesbians are being threatened with the loss of their livelihoods and with physical violence , shouted down and intimidated at public events , and sometimes even assaulted for insisting on their rights to freedom of belief and of expression , and for calling for sex - based protections to be upheld . will the minister condemn that violence and intimidation ? will she urge the prime minister to do so as well and to commit to addressing it by commissioning a rapid review of the impact of extreme trans rights activism on women ’s rights , including the rights of lesbians ? will she also open a call for evidence ? i thank the hon . and learned lady for her question , and i certainly condemn the conduct that she has described . even though holding a gender critical belief is protected in law , both under section 10 of the equality act 2010 and , more widely , under article 9 of the european convention on human rights , i am aware of the polarisation and , sometimes , intimidation that surrounds this debate . i have seen the letter that sex matters wrote to the prime minister , and the hon . and learned lady should be in no doubt about how seriously this is viewed . i have made reference to the protection from sex - based harassment in public act 2023 , which creates an offence of intentional harassment where there is any causal connection , even a weak one , to a person ’s sex , under which such conduct may fall . she has asked for a rapid review , and i would like to meet her to discuss that further and any next steps . a recent large - scale study by the open university on societal attitudes and experiences of online violence against women and girls found that seven in 10 believe that the current legislation is not effective in tackling such violence . almost three quarters of women in scotland , and more than half of men there , want online violence to be made a crime — that is a higher level than was found among those surveyed in england . platforms have a duty of care to their users , so what steps is the minister taking to ensure that new guidance in the online safety act 2023 is effectively enforced and encourages women and girls to come forward with cases of online abuse ? the hon . lady makes an excellent point . there is no doubt that some of the toxic content , including violent pornography , has a serious impact on the way that women and girls are treated and the attitudes that certain men have towards them . as she will know , the online safety act 2023 only received royal assent a month ago , and there is an extended implementation period . she will also know , i hope , that one of the later amendments to the bill accepted by the government placed a statutory obligation on ofcom to publish guidance which summarises the measures that all online services need to take to reduce the risk of violence to women and girls . that is not on its own , but in consultation with the domestic abuse commissioner , the victims commissioner and other experts . the act also places an obligation on social media and pornography providers to prevent children from being exposed to harmful content through new and robust age verification exercises — order . sorry ; i will come back to the hon . lady on that . i welcome the minister to her place . her former colleague , the home secretary , thought homelessness was a lifestyle choice , yet in reality , almost a quarter of homelessness among women and children is due to a violent or abusive relationship . the scottish government are piloting £ 1,000 grants to assist women who have left violent relationships , to help pay for essentials including rent and clothing . has she considered that approach , instead of taking tents off the homeless ? we placed the safety of domestic abuse victims at the heart of the domestic abuse act 2021 . local authorities have been given £ 25 million to ensure that all domestic abuse victims receive priority for housing . in addition , the act places a legal duty on tier 1 local authorities to provide a wide range of support , including refuges . to date , the department for levelling up , housing and communities has allocated £ 377 million for local authorities to comply with the duty to provide housing . it is vital that victims of serious sexual assault are supported through what can often be a lengthy and traumatic process , yet we know that many rape victims do not access early mental health support because their therapy notes can be requested as part of the criminal investigation . that happens far too often and treats the wrong person with suspicion . does the minister agree that a specialist legal advocate for victims could allow them to challenge invasive requests for private information and access the support they need at the time they need it most ? this is an issue that the law commission is looking into , and it already appears in our victims and prisoners bill , so that such requests will never be more than necessary and proportionate . on the subject of whether there should be a dedicated legal adviser , i respectfully draw the hon . gentleman ’s attention to the fact that since 2010 , there are now 950 dedicated independent sexual violence advisers , who can support victims of rape and serious sexual abuse every step of the way . we have quadrupled victims funding to ensure that we continue to grow that cohort . i call the chair of the justice committee . i warmly welcome my hon . friend to her place on the treasury bench ; it is much deserved , and she was a distinguished member of the justice committee . she will know from that time that much work has already been done , following on from operation soteria , to improve investigation , conviction and prosecution rates and the victim experience in relation to rape and serious sexual offences . will she also bear in mind that there are further opportunities , which we highlighted as a committee in our scrutiny of the victims element of the victims and prisoners bill , to improve the victim experience and ensure that it is consistent across the whole country ? i thank my hon . friend for his question and applaud all the work he does as chair of the justice committee . it is undoubtedly true that the victims and prisoners bill plays an important role in putting the victims code on to a statutory footing and giving victims enhanced rights , including a right of review and a right to make an impact statement , which we have supported . i also draw his attention to not just operation soteria but the fact that we are training 2,000 specialist police officers in rape and serious sexual offences , as well as the national roll - out of section 28 evidence procedures , which enable victims of these hideous crimes to give evidence early , privately and behind closed doors , to completely change their experience of the criminal justice system and keep them engaged in the process . i welcome the minister to her well - deserved appointment . she will be aware of the case of david fuller , who , as well as murdering two women , abused the corpses of over 100 women and girls in the mortuaries of the maidstone and tunbridge wells nhs trust . for these crimes , he will rightly die in prison . however , the current legislation is shockingly inadequate on the abuse of dead bodies . it covers only penetrative sexual assault and not other acts of sexual assault on dead bodies . will the minister meet me , my hon . friend i thank my right hon . friend for his question . the david fuller case is appalling , and i send my deepest sympathies to the families of his victims . it is unbelievably dispiriting that we are even having to talk about these acts , and of extending the definition of abuse to meet the width and depravity of his crimes . as my right hon . friend will know , the offence he is referring to is dealt with in section 70 of the sexual offences act 2003 . as a result of the david fuller case , the ministry of justice is now reviewing both the maximum penalty and the scope of the law to ensure that what my right hon . friend describes is adequately captured . of course , i will have a meeting with both him and my hon . friend i call the snp spokesperson . i join others in welcoming the minister to her place . a victims bill has been promised by the conservatives since 2016 , but while the uk government have dithered , the scottish government have introduced the victims , witnesses , and justice reform ( scotland ) bill , which seeks to put victims and witnesses at the heart of the justice system . it ensures that a range of trauma - informed support is available to child victims of violent and sexual abuse crimes , allowing them to give pre - recorded evidence without needing to go to a police station or a court . have the minister and the government considered adopting that approach ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . as he will know , our victims and prisoners bill is making its way through parliament as we speak . he has talked about victim - focused support ; i draw his attention to things like operation soteria , which is directed at rape victims and has now been rolled out on a national basis . that places victims ’ rights at the heart of the inquiry and focuses all the effort on the suspects and their behaviour , so to be honest , what he has described is consistent with our current models of policing and investigating crime . i hope the victims and prisoners bill will conclude its passage through parliament and receive royal assent soon . what additional ( a ) financial and ( b ) practical support the government plans to provide the international criminal court for its war crime investigations . the uk is one of the major funders of the international criminal court , and provides further practical support including sentence enforcement , pro bono expertise in victim and witness protection , and secondments . in june , i met with the prosecutor of the international criminal court , karim khan kc , and i will remain in contact with the icc to discuss what resources it needs to operate effectively . it should go without saying that the international criminal court needs to be able to do its work unimpeded if it is to establish when collateral damage transcends into deliberate slaughter , or whether self - defence was in fact collective punishment . will the government provide a guarantee from the dispatch box that they will not intervene — as they did alongside the united states in 2021 — against any future icc investigation into war crimes perpetrated against the people of gaza ? the hon . gentleman ’s original question was about the resource that we provide to the icc . we are the second largest donor after germany , and we have provided some additional support this year . questions about prosecution are matters for independent prosecutors . it is not for ministers in this parliament to make that sort of decision : that will be a matter for independent prosecutors , whom i would expect to exercise their discretion freely and fairly . what assessment his department has made of the adequacy of legal aid for immigration cases . what assessment his department has made of the adequacy of legal aid for immigration cases . legal aid is available for asylum cases , for victims of domestic abuse and modern slavery , for separated migrant children , and for immigration cases where someone is challenging a detention decision . through the illegal migration act 2023 , individuals who receive a removal notice under the act will have access to free legal advice in relation to that notice . the law society has warned that a proposed 15 % increase in legal aid rates will not be enough to ensure that sufficient immigration lawyers are available to deal with deportations to rwanda . charities supporting refugees make 16 attempts on average before securing a lawyer , while in london , charities are only successfully finding legal representation for 4.1 % of referrals . what steps is the minister taking to ensure that the legal aid sector does not collapse in england and wales due to the poor decisions made by his colleagues ? the 15 % was agreed after a six - week consultation looking at other increases for other specialist work . the legal aid agency will always keep provision under review to ensure that cover is provided for those who need it . there are approximately 175,000 people trapped in the current asylum backlog , many of them living in hotels with no right to support themselves or their families through work . instead of unlawful and pointless dog - whistling gestures such as the government ’s rwanda policy , would it not be better to allow people the opportunity to work and support themselves , and to allow the home office and the legal aid system to be resourced adequately so that we can deal with our international obligations exactly as we ought to ? the question about the home office is one the hon . member may want to raise with home office ministers themselves . on access to legal aid , i would not say that £ 2 billion of legal aid means this is under - resourced . this year alone , we have continued to increase levels of legal aid across the board , and specifically in specialist areas such as immigration , so i reject the notion that it is underfunded . i call the snp spokesperson . the lord chancellor is currently facing a judicial review over the failure to ensure that immigration legal aid is available to those who need it . for example , the south - west has capacity for fewer than 300 people per year , yet the bibby stockholm has capacity for almost 500 . is this not an abject failure of the legal aid system ? it is operating exactly how the government have designed it to : abandoning the most vulnerable to navigate a complex and hostile environment without any recourse to legal representation . is this moral bankruptcy or incompetence , or is it a combination of both ? i do not accept that characterisation at all . in fact , this government are putting legal aid in place to support those affected by the illegal migration act and especially the uplift in fees to ensure that qualified legal advice is available to people , whether physically or through telephone advice . access to justice , and access to legal aid , is there . what progress he has made on improving employment opportunities for ex - offenders . i am pleased to say that the proportion of prison leavers in employment six months after their release has more than doubled in the two years to march 2023 . we have delivered significant reforms in this area , among which are prison employment leads to match prisoners to jobs on release , and business - led employment advisory boards that partner prisoners with industry to benefit from their expertise . while this is very significant progress , there is always more to do , and we are determined to continue to see that figure climb higher . i thank my right hon . friend for that answer . we know that ex - offenders are at high risk of homelessness , particularly immediately on release . we also know that being in work significantly reduces that risk , so the link between the probation service and jobcentre plus in supporting ex - offenders into work is of critical importance . will the minister do everything possible across government to ensure that ex - offenders leave custody with the best possible chance of getting a job ? may i take this opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor as prisons and probation minister , my right hon . friend my hon . friend , as always , is absolutely spot - on that securing employment and preventing homelessness are essential to tackling reoffending . those in work are nearly 10 % less likely to reoffend . we work closely with the department for work and pensions to ensure that prison leavers have effective support to prepare for employment on release . for example , prisoners can meet a dwp prison work coach from 12 weeks before release to provide advice on benefits and employment , including day one access to dwp employment programmes , and we continue to foster those strong links . i thank the minister for his response . veterans very often fall on hard times , find themselves in prison and then become ex - offenders . has the minister had any opportunity to work alongside the minister for veterans ’ affairs to ensure that priority can be given to help veterans get over the bad times and to re - engage in society again ? they have offered so much during their time in the services , and they can do so again if given the opportunity . i am grateful to the hon . gentleman , who is absolutely right to highlight just how much veterans , even when they have got themselves into bother , can offer the community through rehabilitation and through work . although i have not yet had the opportunity to engage with my right hon . friend the minister for veterans ’ affairs , i intend to do so . a whole range of opportunities can work for veterans . just this weekend , i saw the ex - jockey ryan hatch on itv racing talking about his work highlighting equine job opportunities — which are often appropriate for veterans — in prisons . i look forward to working with my right hon . friend — and , indeed , with the hon . gentleman , if he wishes — on this issue . what steps he is taking to increase the number of prison places . what steps he is taking to increase prison capacity . this government have embarked on the biggest prison building programme since the victorian era , to create 20,000 modern , secure , rehabilitative places . to date , we have already delivered 5,600 places , a third prison at hmp millsike is under construction , and last week we secured outline planning permission for our fourth prison , near the existing hmp gartree in leicestershire . i welcome the delivery of 20,000 additional prison places , as well as plans to deport some foreign criminals , rather than jailing them here in the uk . that will free up spaces and deliver considerable savings to the taxpayer . what steps is the secretary of state taking to work with the home office to mitigate the risk of legal challenges as we seek to deport some of those who may pose a risk to the public ? my hon . friend makes an important point . between january 2019 and march 2023 , 14,700 foreign national offenders were served with deportation orders and removed . as he has indicated , we have expanded the early removal scheme to allow for the removal of fnos up to 18 months before the end of the custodial element of their sentence , so that we can bring forward the deportation of criminals who should not be here . on his specific point , we work closely with the home office to ensure that the right people and processes are in place to resist legal challenges . i welcome the measures that my right hon . and learned friend has outlined to increase prison capacity to its largest ever , but he will recognise that capacity in prisons needs to come with capacity in staffing in order to make it a reality . will he update the house on the progress made so far , particularly in the midlands and birmingham ? i am grateful to my hon . friend , who is such a champion on this issue . he is right , and to increase the number of staff we have increased pay , accepting the recommendation of the independent pay review body in full . that means an increase of 7 % for band 3 to band 5 officers , which is wing officers up to custodial managers . we are also backing our officers with the roll - out of body - worn videos for every officer on shift , as well as pava spray in the adult estate . the net result is that the resignation rate is down significantly . that means more people remaining on the wings , improving the quantity and quality of our prison places overall . may i welcome the under - secretary of state for justice , i thank the hon . gentleman for his kind words about my hon . friend . yes , absolutely ; where the court determines that an alternative disposal is appropriate , we are keen for non - custodial options to be available . that is why we are investing heavily in alternatives . there are cases where women offenders must go to jail , but where that is not necessary we want to ensure that alternatives remain so that rehabilitation can take place in the community . now that the government have left themselves with no choice but to send fewer people to prison and let more out early because there is simply no space for them , how many convicted criminals are currently on bail awaiting sentence , compared with this time last year ? when do the government expect normal service to resume ? i am proud of the fact that , unlike the previous government , we are rolling out a prison expansion programme — something that entirely defeated the labour party when it was in office . labour said it was going to roll out three titan prisons . how many did it produce ? absolutely none . on bail , it is the case that the number of those awaiting trial is higher , and up by 6,000 compared with the pre - covid period . that is why this government are expanding capacity on the estate . we have 1,000 more judges , we are increasing the amount of legal aid , and we are ensuring that when people come to be sentenced , unlike under the labour government , they are going to prison for longer . i call the shadow minister . the secretary of state ’s emergency early release scheme is meant to tackle a capacity crisis that is entirely of this government ’s making , and it excludes only serious violence . surely domestic abuse and stalking are serious offences , yet they are not excluded from early release . what kind of signal does that give to victims , the public , and indeed perpetrators of violence against women and girls ? we are proud that under this government sentences for offences such as rape have gone up by a third . we have a situation in which charges are up , the conviction rate is higher and sentences are longer — and , unlike under the labour government , people are spending a higher proportion of those sentences in custody . we think that is the right thing to do . to the hon . member ’s point , the exclusions in place go beyond what he indicated , so he is factually incorrect ; they also include sex offences and terrorist offences . here is a really important point : where the custodial authorities are satisfied that there is a specific risk , there is an opportunity to ensure that release is blocked . that is important , because we will always stand up for victims of crime . argument weak ? go long and do not answer the question — the classic response from this government . the truth is that without any government announcement of a start date , prisons began releasing offenders over a month ago . these men are already walking our streets , but the government will not tell us how many , or why they were behind bars in the first place . why do the government not believe that the public deserve to know who is being released back into the community when a court decided that they should be in prison ? we will make whatever appropriate announcements in due course ; we will not demur from that . we will also not apologise for having , under this government , a higher custodial population than before . we are taking robust steps to ensure that the public are protected , which means unashamedly that those who commit the most serious offences — those such as murder in the context of sexual or sadistic conduct — go to prison for the rest of their lives . will the hon . member support that ? i wonder . we are also using the evidence so that those capable of rehabilitation are rehabilitated . one thing that we will not ever put at risk is the threat to women and girls . as the under - secretary of state for justice , my hon . friend here is a man who will go short : i call sir desmond swayne . whether he is taking steps to increase levels of public confidence in non - custodial sentences . to earn public confidence , non - custodial sentences must self - evidently be punitive , so that the british people can see that offenders are being punished for their crimes . they must also be enforceable , so that judges and magistrates can be confident that those who step out of line risk being brought back before the court and sentenced to immediate custody . that is why we are doubling the number of the latest gps tags available to the court , so that offenders can be strictly monitored , and we have increased funding for the probation service by £ 155 million a year . it is essential that every advantage be had from the latest monitoring technology , is n’t it ? pithy and perfect — my right hon . friend is absolutely right . under the old technology , all that the so - called radio frequency tags could tell the probation service was whether that individual had left the premises to which he had been bailed or curfewed . the modern gps tags are far more effective , because they can indicate where that person has gone , keeping them under a tight rein . we have additional tags , including alcohol monitoring tags to allow the courts and probation services also to monitor alcohol where that is the root cause of the offending . is the evidence not clear that short prison sentences do not work , and that women ’s centres , which deal with drug and alcohol abuse , mental health issues and so on , can be effective ? it would make a lot of sense to roll that out for the male population — it is cheaper and it is better . i am delighted to hear that from the hon . gentleman . we have to follow the evidence , which shows that short sentences of immediate custody lead to a higher reoffending rate than those where the sentence is suspended , albeit on tight conditions , which might include curfew , an unpaid work order and potentially a rehabilitation requirement . why ? because if the offender fails to comply , the probation service can find them in breach and bring them back before the court , where they will then likely hear the clang of the prison gate . we will follow the evidence . we make no apology for using our custodial estate to lock up the most dangerous offenders for longer and take them out of circulation . but protecting the public also means ensuring that those who would otherwise reoffend get off the conveyor belt of crime . what assessment he has made of the adequacy of the conditions in the prison estate for the rehabilitation of offenders . by the end of the spending review period , we will have invested nearly £ 4 billion to deliver an additional 20,000 modern prison places and ensure that the right conditions are in place to rehabilitate prisoners , cut crime and protect the public . the key to effective rehabilitation is the provision of education and skills training , to increase a prisoner ’s employability and ensure that they can access employment upon release , alongside providing support for substance misuse , treatment and so on . we are also investing to improve rehabilitative spaces in prison , having delivered our employment hubs , where prisoners can access job vacancies . we will renovate prison workshops through our hmp academies programme . no glass , just bars at the window ; mice and rats ; faeces in the gravy ; and sewage overflows regularly in his cell . this is not the start of a victorian novel , but the disgrace experienced by my young constituent , who was locked in his shared cell for 23 and a half hours a day , having never received the vital specialist mental health support that he needed . when can we expect such draconian conditions at hmp hull to end ? what appropriate steps will the minister take to ensure that people in prison experience rehabilitation , not the conditions that my constituent faced ? if the hon . lady would like to write to me , i will be happy to look into that specific case . but in broad terms , in the last financial year this government invested £ 217 million in capital and maintenance spending , up from £ 149 million in 2010 - 2011 . that includes , since 2020 , delivering £ 73 million of capital maintenance projects across yorkshire . security is not a dirty word in this context but is vital to creating conditions in which people can be safe and rehabilitated . we continue to work closely with the nhs on improving things such as mental health support for those in prison , but i am happy to engage with her on this issue . if the government will make an assessment of the potential merits of extending the unduly lenient sentence scheme to include additional offences . in 2019 we expanded the unduly lenient sentence scheme to include 14 new offences , including further child sexual offences and coercive or controlling behaviour . we have no immediate plans to extend the scheme further , but we keep it under constant review . i welcome the new minister to his place ; his is an excellent appointment and i wish him every success . the fact that malicious wounding , actual bodily harm , burglary and even rape , when dealt with in the youth courts , do not come under the unduly lenient sentence scheme is plain wrong . will he please review that situation , which time and again lets down the victims of those serious crimes ? the unduly lenient sentence scheme is intended for use in serious cases for offenders sentenced in the crown court . the attorney general has the power to refer a sentence to the court of appeal for review if they believe it is unduly lenient . a youth court can sentence a child to up to two years of detention only . where a child ’s offence is likely to attract a sentence of more than two years , the case must be passed to the crown court for sentencing , where the scheme therefore applies . stiffening unduly lenient crown court sentences is all very well , but there will still be delays in the system if there are backlogs in prosecuting in the courts . up to 25 % of criminal barristers have left the profession over the past five years , so what action are the government taking to address the exodus of criminal barristers ? in recent years the government have invested an extra £ 141 million in criminal legal aid , which should expedite a solution to the situation . if he will make an assessment of the impact of changes in sentencing guidelines on causing death by dangerous driving on the length of sentences . the police , crime , sentencing and courts act 2022 increased the maximum penalty for causing death by dangerous driving from 14 years to life imprisonment . in june 2023 , the independent sentencing council published revised sentencing guidelines for motoring offences , including for causing death by dangerous driving . it is too early to assess the outcome of those changes , but we regularly publish sentencing statistics on gov.uk . the sentencing council also monitors all guidelines in accordance with its statutory duty . i welcome my hon . friend to his position . it is over a year since parliament legislated to increase the maximum sentence for death by dangerous driving to life imprisonment . however , three members of my constituent summer mace ’s family were killed in a horrific incident , and in june the offender got only 10 and a half years . that is totally inadequate . as roadpeace has shown , far too many sentences are too short . will my hon . friend meet me to discuss those sentencing guidelines , so that we can ensure that they reflect what parliament actually legislated for ? i was very sorry to hear of the death of paul carter , lisa carter and jade mace in january 2023 in a collision caused by aurelijus cielevicius , and the devastating consequences for their family and friends . i know that my hon . friend has campaigned hard on this issue , and i read his adjournment debate earlier this month . sentencing is entirely a matter for our independent courts , based on the facts of each case . in july 2023 , after cielevicius was sentenced , the revised sentencing council guidelines for causing death by dangerous driving came into force , following the increase of the maximum penalty introduced by the pcsc act 2022 . i would be happy to meet my hon . friend to discuss that further , should that be helpful . the man who was convicted of causing death by careless driving when he killed my young constituent gregg was sentenced to only nine months in prison . however , because he was charged with causing death by careless driving , not dangerous driving , gregg ’s family had no right to appeal under the attorney general ’s unduly lenient sentence scheme . will the minister agree to discuss this with the attorney general and look into revising the scheme to include causing death by careless driving ? i was very sorry to hear the details of that particular case . i will , of course , be very happy to raise it with the attorney general . what steps he is taking to improve the provision of education for children in custody . we work closely with education providers to drive up standards of teaching and improve academic outcomes . the curriculum offered to children in custody is needs - led and determined by individual aspirations , literacy and numeracy levels , interests and sentence length . where education provision is inadequate , we will hold providers to account to ensure that children receive the education they need to turn away from crime . earlier this year , i visited feltham young offenders institution and witnessed at first hand the very challenging conditions in which dedicated professionals work with young people who have committed the most serious crimes and had a very difficult start in life . back in 2016 , the charlie taylor review recommended that we move away from young offenders institutions to secure schools . the government fully accepted his vision , yet seven years on not a single secure school has opened . one has been built , but it has not admitted any pupils . if the government are serious about rehabilitating young offenders and cutting reoffending , when will they finally roll out secure schools for those pupils ? in a previous life as a minister , as it were , i had youth justice in my portfolio back in 2018 - 19 , and i had the opportunity to visit feltham at that time . i worked with charlie taylor on delivering those recommendations into practice . i am pleased to tell the hon . lady that we anticipate the first secure school opening in 2024 . i welcome the new shadow minister . thank you , mr speaker . education is vital to reduce violence , especially on the youth estate . however , violence on the youth estate is skyrocketing . since last year , assaults on staff have increased by 33 % . that puts prison staff at risk in their workplace and increases the trauma experienced by children and young people . it can also prolong their rehabilitation . how will the minister use education and other methods available to him to reduce that violence ? it is nice to be taking questions from the hon . lady in her new role as shadow minister , rather than when she used to question me in the justice committee . she is absolutely right to highlight the challenges of violence across the youth estate , which have been too high for too long , and we continue to work hard across all sites to address it . among the measures put in place , we are ensuring that each child receives a full needs assessment , covering education , psychology , resettlement , health and behavioural support . education and skills play a vital part in helping children and young people to get their lives back on course , but that must be in the context of a secure environment , because security has to be the premise on which all those other benefits can be delivered . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of the suspension of short sentences on the probation service . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of the suspension of short sentences on the probation service . to expand probation capacity , we have increased funding by £ 155 million a year to deliver effective supervision of offenders in the community . in 2020 - 21 we recruited an additional 1,000 trainee officers , 1,500 more in the following year , and 1,500 more in the year after that . this means that offenders who pose the highest risk to communities will receive robust supervision . successive conservative ministers have allowed the criminal justice system to fall into its current parlous state , making many communities , including in cambridge , less safe . now they propose to shift the burden from an over - pressed prison service to an over - pressed probation service . can the secretary of state guarantee that the money that should have been available to prisons will be moved to the probation service to allow it to keep our communities safe ? the first point is not right ; since 2010 , the overall levels of crime have fallen by 40 % . as for the second point , reoffending has dropped from about 32 % to about 25 % . the third point , on probation , is , with respect , a better one . as we move towards suspended sentence orders , it is right for them to be robust and enforceable so that if people step out of line they can expect to hear the clang of the prison gate , and that is why i am engaging with the leadership of the probation service . yesterday i also met frontline probation officers , because i want to hear from them how we can ensure that their workload is manageable and they have the resources that they need to keep our communities safe . i refer members to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i echo the concerns of the union of shop , distributive and allied workers and the british independent retailers association , which fear that the scrapping of short sentences will only embolden retail criminals . the secretary of state will know that far too many shop workers face being attacked in shops across the uk , particularly as we approach the festive period . according to the police , there has been a 24 % increase in shoplifting in the past year . can the secretary of state assure us that the probation service can cope with the expected surge in retail crime , and ensure that those who work in shops will be protected and anyone who attacks them will face the full force of the law ? those who behave in such an appalling way should expect to feel exactly that : the full force of the law . let me be crystal clear : those who pose a particular threat to individuals can expect to hear the clang of the prison gate . those who commit offences while subject to an order — be it , for instance , a community order , a stalking prevention order or a domestic abuse protection order — can also expect to be outwith the presumption . through the use of tags , we can ensure that people who do not abide by stringent requirements — which , by the way , could include not going to a particular shopping precinct — can expect one outcome , and one outcome only : prison . i call the shadow minister . in response to the question from my hon . friend on a point of detail , as of if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . since the last justice questions , we have introduced a criminal justice bill , which responds rapidly and robustly to the latest criminal threats . it will include strengthened laws to criminalise those who breach trust by taking intimate images without consent ; broaden the offence of encouraging and assisting self - harm ; give judges the power to order offenders to attend sentencing hearings ; and enable the probation service to polygraph - test more terrorists and sex offenders . meanwhile , the new sentencing bill has public protection at its core , making the severest punishments available for the most dangerous offenders , such as murderers who kill with sexual or sadistic conduct , to take them out of circulation forever . it will protect the public by breaking the cycle of reoffending to reduce crime . we have also welcomed my hon . friends the members for newbury ( laura farris ) and for orpington ( gareth bacon ) to the front bench . as i think the house has already observed , they will make a formidable contribution to public life . the prime minister and certain other senior government figures have suggested that the european convention on human rights should be disapplied in some asylum cases , and the deputy chairman of the conservative party , the government are confident that we can deliver on the priorities of the british people while remaining within the four corners of our international legal obligations . make no mistake , we are determined to ensure that our borders are secure . this is a rule of law issue . it should not be the case that those who try to jump the queue and arrive illegally should derive some sort of advantage from that . we understand that clearly on the government benches and we will do everything we can to stop the boats . one of the primary reasons for adjournment and relisting in magistrates courts is a lack of trained probation officers to carry out pre - sentence stand - down reports . could the minister outline what steps he is taking to address this so that courts can get through caseloads more speedily ? my hon . friend speaks with great authority as a magistrate , and i know from my own experience as a practitioner how important stand - down reports are . they provide the bench with information about the offender — their relationship situation , their record of previous convictions , their mental health problems and so on — so that the court can tailor a disposal that punishes the offender but also progresses their rehabilitation . we are working closely with the probation service to ensure that that resource is properly allocated so that we can have more stand - down reports to ensure better justice on the facts of each case . i call the shadow minister , alex cunningham . contrary to the claims of ministers at every question time that they are getting the courts backlog sorted out , they are not , and the pain just drags on for victims . the crown court backlog reached a record 65,000 cases at the end of june . nearly 5,000 of them have been waiting for two years and 36,000 cases have defendants on bail . why are things still getting worse ? i have to say , mr speaker , that god loves a trier . yes , the backlog has gone up . the hon . gentleman will know that post covid and post the criminal bar association strike , the backlog did increase . on top of that , this government have cracked down on crime with more police officers , and that has meant more people being charged and appearing in court . we are addressing this with unlimited sitting days . we recruited 1,000 judges across all jurisdictions last year and we are doing the same this year . we have invested in the court estate to improve resilience , and we have extended 24 nightingale courts to ensure that we have capacity . come on now — we know that the statistics tell a very different story . the crown courts remain in crisis , and what about the civil courts ? the quarterly civil justice statistics from april to june 2023 show that the average time taken for small claims and multi - fast - tracked claims to go to trial was 52 weeks and 78 weeks respectively . is it the same excuse for the crisis in the civil courts ? since the government have increased the amount of money spent on the children and family court advisory and support service , we have recruited judges across the jurisdiction to help in the civil courts , increased the number of days that fee - paid judges can do from 30 days to 80 days a year , introduced regional virtual pilots to support london and the south - east , and invested in mediation . all of this is ensuring that people have access to justice in a court system that is dealing with higher numbers of cases than ever before . the minister will be aware that approximately £ 1 million of taxpayers ’ money was spent , including through legal aid , on finally deporting the vile sex offender yaqub ahmed , whose crimes were just unimaginable . will the secretary of state and the minister ensure that legal aid processes are reviewed and , importantly , dust off the previous plans to introduce wasted cost orders in immigration cases so that lawyers who pursue these spurious cases are prevented from doing so ? as my right hon . friend will appreciate , i can not comment on individual cases , but i can reassure her that the payment of wasted or unreasonable costs can already be ordered by the tribunal if it considers it appropriate . given the issue that she has raised , however , i would be more than happy to meet her to ensure that her concerns are conveyed firmly to those responsible for the reviews . eight courts have so far been named as containing reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete — raac — and three of them are closed . the government will not say which prisons are affected , but will they guarantee that funding for raac removal will not come at the expense of existing maintenance schemes , given the huge backlog of repairs in courts and prisons ? the hon . gentleman is right about the eight court buildings , but that is in the context of an estate of over 300 buildings . it is important to note , however , that we have massively increased the budget for the court estate , and that enables us to do two things . first , we can take on more projects and also plan them because we have guaranteed this over two years , meaning that we can plan in a more efficient and effective way . the second issue so far as prisons are concerned is that separate considerations apply because the buildings are used for a whole range of different purposes ; there is the prison itself , but there are plenty of ancillary buildings . this is all being inspected in the normal way , and the budget is certainly there to effect remediations if required . last week i visited my local co - op store in hartburn , where i met staff and union of shop , distributive and allied workers reps as part of respect for shopworkers week . there are around 867 assaults on shop workers not each month , not each week but every single day . we can not go on like this . will my right hon . and learned friend look again at what we can do to tackle this issue and deliver justice for shop workers ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . those people are on the frontline of society , acting effectively in public to do an incredibly important public service . we have already moved to ensure that the courts can treat assaults on shop workers as an aggravating factor when it comes to sentencing . to be clear , this means that , in appropriate cases , the fact that a person has assaulted a retail worker can mean the difference between a non - custodial penalty and a custodial penalty , which is absolutely right . those who behave in such a cowardly way should expect all consequences . the rule of law is sacrosanct , is n’t it ? yes . does my right hon . and learned friend agree that the judiciary must not make incendiary comments about israel ? at walsall magistrates court , a district judge recently acquitted defendants who had vandalised a factory , believing it to be supplying israel , and is reported to have told them their action was “ proportionate in comparison to the crimes against humanity which they were acting to stop . ” does he agree that judges are supposed to uphold the law , not encourage its breach ? this brings our legal system into ill - repute , so will he take this from me as a complaint to the judicial conduct investigations office ? order . we are not meant to criticise the courts , and i know that such a learned gentleman will know better ; i am sure we can avoid any criticism . i simply note the question . plainly , i make no comment on the specifics . i have heard my right hon . and learned friend ’s point , and i will happily take it up with him subsequently . the ministry of justice has released its latest quarterly statistics on deaths and self - harm in the england and wales prison estate . the rate of self - harm incidents among female prisoners went up by a stark 63 % compared with the same quarter last year , and there was an overall 24 % increase in self - inflicted deaths . what assessment has the secretary of state made of the impact of the moj ’s policies on these increases across the prison estate ? the hon . gentleman is right to highlight this , as every death in custody is a tragedy . we continue to do all we can to improve the safety of prisoners , both in that respect and in respect of reducing instances of self - harm . we are continuing to deliver on our safety commitment outlined in the prisons strategy white paper , including by introducing more ligature - resistant cells , funding a study to understand the extent of deaths , and rolling out an emotional resilience and peer - support programme in six prisons . of course , our staff are vital to this , and i take the opportunity to pay tribute to them ; we are investing to support them to continue to do that work . in the summer , the government made a welcome announcement on banning zombie knives and machetes and doubling the sentences for supplying a knife to an under-18 and for possessing a knife with intent to cause harm . now we are in a new session , will the secretary of state set out the timeline for bringing forward legislation to make this happen ? i am grateful to my right hon . friend , who is a passionate and principled campaigner on the issue of public safety . these measures will find their way into the criminal justice bill . i look forward to her support , which i know will be forthcoming . let us hope that hon . members right across the house will put public protection as one of their priorities . new figures released by the co - op group show that a staggering 300,000 incidents of shoplifting , abuse , violence and antisocial behaviour in co - op stores have been reported this year alone . surely the best way to stop violence against shop workers is to make it a stand - alone offence , as requested by the labour party , the co - op party and the usdaw trade union . it is important to establish what is already available to the police : section 39 on common assault , section 47 on assault occasioning actual bodily harm and — heaven forbid — sections 20 and 18 , which relate to more serious cases of grievous bodily harm . plus , if an individual is convicted on any of those grounds , the courts can — indeed , ought to — consider assault on a retail worker as an aggravating factor . as i have indicated , that can mean the difference between a non - custodial and a custodial penalty . we will keep these matters under review , but the central point is that before someone can go before the court , they have to be arrested . that is why i am delighted that we have more police officers than at any time in our history , ready to take the fight to those who assault shop workers . my right hon . and learned friend has a terrific record on dealing with slapps — strategic lawsuits against public participation — so he will understand how greedy lawyers encourage their billionaire clients to crush their opponents by extending court cases , dragging them out and multiplying them . what has not been taken on board is that that also costs the taxpayer millions of pounds . i think those lawyers should have to meet those costs . with that in mind , will he publish the costs incurred by slapps cases ? no one in this house has done more than my right hon . friend to clamp down on this iniquitous behaviour , and i am pleased that we have been able to make some progress . he makes a really important point : every day that is spent in court pursuing ill - founded and abusive litigation is time that could be spent on other matters in the public interest . i will certainly look into the interesting suggestion he makes about publishing the cost of that behaviour . after the supreme court ruling on rwanda , the hon . member for ashfield ( lee anderson ) said that the government should “ ignore the laws ” and put planes in the air anyway . the prime minister has failed to distance himself from those comments . does that disappoint the justice secretary ? i refer the hon . gentleman to the answer i gave a few moments ago . there is understandable righteous indignation about the situation that exists . we believe that we can comply and deliver our policies within the four corners of international law — that is our approach . however , those who arrive illegally threaten to corrode the rule of law , because that of itself sends out a poor subliminal message that those who do so can act with impunity . that does not strengthen the rule of law . the justice secretary will know of the hard work undertaken in this parliament to bring the desecration of war memorials bill into law . elements of that bill were subsumed into the police , crime , sentencing and courts act 2022 , but will he now undertake to complete the job ? my hon . friend is one of two hon . members who have fought hard on this issue , and he does so from the position of having served his country . it is completely iniquitous that people should seek to act in a way that desecrates war memorials . his specific point seems utterly compelling and i am happy to discuss it with him hereafter . the justice secretary is an experienced lawyer , for whom i have a great deal of respect . will he explain to the prime minister that following the supreme court ’s judgment on rwanda , merely to legislate that the facts on the ground in rwanda are the opposite of what the supreme court found them to be will make no difference to the problems the supreme court has identified , and will simply make the government a laughing stock ? i thank the hon . and learned lady for her point . at the risk of harming her political career , the respect is entirely mutual . in a rule - of - law country , people can disagree with the decision of a court but they must respect it . we respect the ruling and of course we will abide by court orders , but it is also right that we carefully consider what the supreme court said and seek to adjust appropriately . we will do what we properly and lawfully can do to stop the boats . that is our mission and the mission of the british people , and we will deliver on it . i welcome my right hon . and learned friend ’s commitment to increase the use of tagging , where appropriate , to reduce the amount of reoffending . in doing so , what plans does he have to include high - risk domestic abusers and , potentially in the future , those who are illegal drug users ? not for the first or last time , my hon . and learned friend has got absolutely to the point . we have deliberately constructed the policy so that if an individual presents a significant threat to a particular individual — often a spouse or a partner — the presumption would not apply . that is critically important and i was happy to discuss that point with women ’s aid and other relevant bodies . we are on the side of victims of domestic abuse and violence , and nothing that we do will cut across that important principle . supporting offenders in practising their faith is regularly cited as playing a key role in their rehabilitation in prisons . however , as the minister will know from my frequent correspondence with the chief executive of his majesty ’s prison service , many prisons either do not provide the facilities required or actively hinder offenders in practising their religion . hmp full sutton has been brought to my attention as one such example . given its importance , will the minister assure me that a full review of faith provision across the prison estate will be conducted and guarantee that no one will be denied the ability to freely practise their religion ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for his question . he is absolutely right to highlight not only the right of people to practise their religion , but the important role that that can play for those individuals in coping with prison life , rehabilitation and getting on the straight and narrow when they come out . i am happy to engage with him directly on any specific case that he wishes to bring up , and it is an issue that i am happy to look at . i thank the courts minister for his recent letter on recruitment and retention of legal advisers in essex and the impact that that is having on court listings . although i know that he and i agree about the independence of the judiciary regarding individual cases , will he meet me to discuss what more might be done to fill the vacancies for legal advisers in essex ? i am always happy to meet my right hon . friend . the secretary of state has alluded to the continuing reduction in reoffending rates among those leaving prison . does he agree that central to maintaining confidence in the wider community is that the reoffending rate goes down further still ? the hon . gentleman makes a simple but incredibly important point . we want to follow the evidence so that we protect the public . we will do so , on the one hand , by locking up the most serious offenders for longer and taking them out of circulation , and , on the other , by cutting offending . fewer crimes mean a better protected public . that is the approach that we will take . yesterday , i met former prisoner lj flanders who , while serving his sentence , devised a fitness regime that can be conducted in a cell with no special gym equipment . with the support of bucks association for the care of offenders , he has just run a two - week training programme in hmp aylesbury to train other prisoners to provide coaching and mentoring of a similar style . will my right hon . friend please encourage everybody in his majesty ’s prison and probation service , particularly governors , to facilitate such courses to reduce reoffending ? i am grateful to my hon . friend , who knows about what he speaks . i pay tribute to him for his work in the criminal justice system . he highlights an example that sounds extremely interesting . i would be happy to meet him to hear more about it and to see where we can take things from there . mr deputy speaker , since my statement to the house on we drew on the sharpest and most expert minds from non - governmental organisations , academia , business , nearly 50 governments around the world , and all political parties in the house . i particularly wish to thank colleagues across the house for their contributions to shaping this white paper . this is an area of policy that does not belong either to the conservative party or to labour ; it is a british policy and commitment . as the whole house knows , development has helped transform the lives of billions of people . the uk can be immensely proud of our distinct contribution to this incredible success story . two centuries ago , three quarters of the world lived in extreme poverty . when i was born , around half still did . by 2015 , when the world met the millennium development goals , the proportion of a much larger global population had fallen to just 12 % . evidence shows that development works , but it also shows that we now need to think about how we do development . after decades of hard - won but persistent progress , we live in a world facing a daunting set of challenges : a world that is seeing rising poverty , where progress is in retreat ; a world where the un sustainable development goals are nearly all off track for 2030 ; a world where faith in multilateral institutions is fading despite co - operation being desperately needed ; a world facing a climate crisis , growing conflict and the prospect of further pandemics ; a contested world , where unity and solidarity are increasingly important , yet ever more difficult to achieve . this white paper sets out a road map to 2030 , charting the path the uk must take to galvanise global attention and lead by example in the fight to end extreme poverty , tackle climate change and address biodiversity loss . when it comes to international development , finance matters . the government have been clear on our intention to return to 0.7 % of gni when the fiscal circumstances permit , but the white paper also makes it clear that we will not achieve the sustainable development goals through business - as - usual official development assistance funding . we need a quantum leap in financing and investing , which only the private sector can provide . the private sector is an essential engine of development , giving communities the building blocks for economic independence . self - sufficiency is development ’s essential purpose , and our work with the uk private sector delivers back for taxpayers many times over . british investment international , formerly known as cdc , is already a core part of the government ’s offer on international development . it has an impressive track record , and now will go further and faster , investing in the hardest places . as was suggested by the international development committee , to whom i pay tribute , bii will aim to make more than half of its investments in the poorest and most fragile countries by 2030 , while also enhancing its transparency , cementing its place as a world leader . the white paper presents our vision for much - needed reform of the international financial system , mobilising greater finance from the private sector and scaling up the lending capacity of the international financial institutions . the uk has pioneered the use of climate - resilient debt clauses , enabling vulnerable countries to hold off on debt repayments following an extreme weather event . together with prime minister mia mottley and other supporters of the bridgetown initiative , we are driving reforms of the multilateral development banks so that they can scale up financing for low and middle - income countries . we will also work with institutional investors such as pension funds to plug the sdg ’s $ 3.9 trillion annual financing gap . international development and climate action are inseparable . climate change and nature loss are being felt everywhere , and their impact will only intensify over the next decade . it will be most acute in developing countries , reversing fragile development gains , increasing food prices and compounding insecurity and instability . to meet that challenge , we must mobilise more — and more reliable — finance . we will deliver on our pledge to provide £ 11.6 billion in international climate finance in the five years up to 2026 . we will ensure a balance between adaptation and mitigation financing and provide at least £ 3 billion to protect and restore nature . britain ’s work on women and girls is paramount . we can not understand development unless we see it through the eyes of girls and women . increasing access to education , empowering women so that they can decide for themselves whether and when they have children , and ending sexual violence are central to economic opportunity and growth . those rights are universal and should be non - negotiable . the white paper extends and reinvigorates that work . we will use research and diplomacy to end the preventable deaths of mothers , babies and children . we will deploy policy and investment to defend and advance sexual and reproductive health and rights . effective development is rooted in respectful partnerships of equals , but the government will continue to stand up for our values . we know that individual rights , the rule of law and strong institutions are essential to achieving sustainable development . take for example the work of the westminster foundation for democracy , to which members of parliament make such a substantial contribution . it is the uk ’s leading champion of democracy globally . we are increasing our support for its work so that we can support fairer , more inclusive and more accountable democratic systems around the world . we must also find better ways to anticipate and prevent humanitarian crises and the conflicts that often drive them . conflict and instability are on the rise and hold back development : by 2030 up to two thirds of the world ’s poor will live in fragile and conflict - affected contexts . humanitarian needs are at their highest since 1945 , with twice as many people needing assistance compared with five years ago . the resulting devastation is spreading across affected regions , as seen at present in the sahel and the middle east . the tragic events in israel and gaza bring home the humanitarian costs of conflict and violence , with women and children most directly affected . i am therefore pleased to announce today that we will create a fund dedicating up to 15 % of our bilateral humanitarian spend to support resilience and adaptation alongside our delivery of humanitarian relief , which we expect to amount to £ 1 billion next year . when i visited families in east africa suffering the worst drought in 40 years , it was clear that the current focus on immediate relief comes at the cost of early thinking and building in resilience and adaptation for the future . the new fund will respond directly to that specific challenge . innovation is at the heart of our efforts to transform lives through sustainable growth . the wondrous creativity of science and technology can address problems that money alone will never solve . only by sharing research and innovating together can we make the breakthroughs that our world needs . the world has never been so intimately connected , nor our fates so closely entwined . although we can rightly be proud of all we have done to deliver international development , the uk and our global partners must redouble our efforts given the challenges that we faced to achieve those goals . we asked in the white paper what the uk could do . we were told to make a new development offer based on mutual respect , powered by finance at scale , and supported by a more responsive international system . we have listened : that is what the white paper will deliver . the prime minister has launched the white paper to do development more effectively and differently , and yesterday ’s global food security summit was an example of that . i commend this statement to the house . i thank the minister for his statement , for advance sight of the white paper , and for our frequent conversations about it since i was appointed to my post . the catastrophe in gaza is a strong reminder not just of the need for humanitarian assistance and expertise , but of the heavy responsibility that we all face to play our part in the world through the painstaking hard yards of diplomacy , and of the crucial role of development in providing the hope that breathes life into any peace process . i thank the minister for his personal efforts to bring some energy and direction to this agenda again . in fact , i would go as far as saying that i do not believe that the house would be in a position to consider a new white paper were he not in post — a view that i think is shared by many on the opposition benches . however , to have an honest conversation about where we are heading , we need a frank assessment of where we have been . there was the mindless vandalism of the decision to take one of our most respected , influential contributions to the world — the partnerships , thought leadership and innovation — and trash the lot to deflect from a domestic crisis . there was the former prime minister who , shamed by a young footballer into abandoning his decision to allow children to go hungry in a pandemic , pulled the rug out from under the poorest people in the poorest countries . make no mistake : that cost lives , but it also cost britain its reputation as a gold - standard leader in the field . as the minister said then , it was “ a strategic mistake with deadly consequences . ”—[official report , he knows that i admire his determination to speak out against those decisions , and i know that he does not shy away from acknowledging the damage that they have done . although the former prime minister may be gone , his second in command , whose signature is scrawled across those documents , now sits in no . 10 . his short words at the start of the white paper leave me in no doubt that , although his posture has changed , his position has not . frankly , asking the man who signed off the devastation of this vital agenda , only to breathe new life into it again , is like calling out the arsonist to put out the fire . for much of the agenda that the minister set out today , he will have our support . the question is whether he will have that of his prime minister . the minister is right to recognise that the major obstacle to eliminating extreme poverty is the growing challenge of climate change and debt , but the key is how to resolve it . the multilateral system is strained — much of the world ’s debt is owed to private creditors , and over recent decades china ’s influence has grown — so we strongly welcome the recognition in the white paper that britain ’s approach to development must sit in a multipolar world . however , multilateral aid will fall to just 25 % of aid spending by 2025 . although the commitments in this white paper are welcome , the minister is prioritising multilateralism while his department prioritises bilateralism . which is it ? we have a strategy at odds with the ambition . the second problem is that to make the strategy work , the minister will need to convince the world that britain is a long - term reliable partner with serious commitment at the highest levels of government , yet his own white paper is silent on protecting the overseas development assistance budget from raids from other departments , after 30 % has been raided in the past year by the home office alone to pay for spiralling hotel bills and the cost of this government ’s chaos . what chance does he have of convincing the world that this area is a priority for the government if he can not convince his colleagues around the cabinet table ? i suspect that on the central issue — the need to deal with debt and finance constraints that block action on climate — he and i have more in common than he does with most of them . there is much to welcome in the white paper , but access to finance for many of the most heavily indebted countries is ultimately unachievable . he is embracing some of the new ideas on finance , but when it comes to the central issue of debt , where is the fresh thinking ? the outsized role of the city of london compels us to do more . now is the time not to cling to existing strategies , but to leave no stone unturned . the problem of climate finance and debt for middle - income countries enables us to focus on low - income countries and the core task of eliminating extreme poverty , but there is far too little in the white paper about how that can be achieved . we welcome the focus on conflict , but the route out of poverty lies not just in access to finance and in functioning economies , but in self - sustaining health , education and welfare systems designed and run by the people in those countries . what can he do to reassure the house that that is not a second - order issue ? finally , the minister and i have discussed the central importance of women and girls many times . they have been among the biggest losers of the decisions of recent decades . empowering them is the biggest untapped driver of growth in the global economy , and there is no way of meeting the sustainable development goals without closing that shameful gap . that is why they must run like a thread through the whole agenda — not just in addition to it , and not a few pages in a document . every single decision that comes across his desk must consider whether it does more to empower and enable women and girls to succeed , or less . i welcome and support the minister ’s commitment to this agenda , but without the political backing , without the budget and without the priority in government , he will not succeed . he is far more alive to the scale and nature of the problems that britain and the world face than most of his colleagues , but the challenges of this era demand an end to old ways of thinking and an embracing of the new . i know he is open to it , but are his government ? i thank the hon . lady for her co - operation and her kind personal remarks . she will know that , in order to get buy - in from our friends and experts around the world and from the civil service , the white paper needed to run to 2030 . in the unlikely event that my party is not in government after the next election , any other government would , i hope , build on it to make it a huge success . i note the hon . lady ’s remarks about the merger of dfid into the foreign office . my task , which the prime minister gave me , was to try to make the merger work . that means there needs to be an ability within government to focus on global public goods and delivering them into the 2030s . that is what i am trying to do . she rightly asks how we get the balance right between multilateralism and bilateral funding . the answer is that we use either , depending on what delivers for our taxpayers and what delivers results on the ground . that is the yardstick ; there is no ideology . we go with what works and what is best . the hon . lady pointed out the increase in spending in other departments of oda money and the development budget . it is true that that has gone up , but every penny is spent within the rules laid down by the oecd development assistance committee . we brought in the innovation of the oda star chamber in whitehall , co - chaired by the development minister and the chief secretary to the treasury . there is already clear evidence of that ratcheting up the quality of oda , as the hon . lady would wish . the hon . lady talked about access to finance for poor countries , which is incredibly important . mitigation projects in middle - income countries are easy by contrast ; when it comes to poor countries and adaptation , it is much more difficult . she will see the emphasis in the white paper on accepting the advice from the select committee on increasing the amount that british international investment does in poor countries . she will notice , too , the emphasis on social protection , and the fact that 62 % of the budget will now be spent in fragile and conflict states . finally , the hon . lady asked about debt , where she is right that we need to do far more . it is absurd that a country such as ghana can borrow only for seven or eight years , yet our children can get mortgages for 30 years . ghana borrows at 7 % , and our children borrow at 2 % . that is clearly completely wrong , but there is a lot of new thinking . she will have seen the climate resilient debt clauses launched by britain and the work we are doing on the g20 common framework to increase access for countries . it is also important to ensure that the private sector is bound into debt settlements when they affect sovereign states . i welcome the white paper and its focus on using oda to leverage private sector investment in the way that my right hon . friend has described . whether the mentari programme for energy transition in indonesia or the guarantees that the uk provides to the african development bank on climate finance , does he agree that it is the combination of aid and british business that is a real force multiplier in this area ? my right hon . friend knows a great deal about this area from his past ministerial posts , and he is absolutely right . the key trick is to secure the status money , whether provided by the multilateral banks or the development finance institutions , and to marry it with the private sector and the $ 60 trillion of pension funds out there . if we can marry the two , de - risk through using that status money , and show pension managers what the real risk and the scale of the returns are , we can achieve the holy grail of getting enormous amounts of more money into climate finance , mitigation and adaptation , which is what the bridgetown agenda is all about . i call the scottish national party spokesperson . the minister has consulted widely , and he truly has a refreshingly collaborative cross - party approach . we in the snp broadly welcome the tone of it and some of the detail around mutual respect , listening to local partners , the recognition of civil society and the potential role of diaspora communities . however , the minister will not be surprised that we want him to go further , and i will list a few of the things i would like to hear more about . snp colleagues will have more to add on that . the first and probably the most important thing is the fact that there is no concrete recommitment to 0.7 % , as recommended by the international development committee . in the entire document of 154 pages , there is one mention of 0.7 % , where the white paper states that the government will recommit to it “ once the fiscal situation allows . ” if the fiscal situation currently allows for tax cuts , i would say that that moment has arrived . the new foreign secretary was instrumental in getting us to 0.7 % in the first place , so i hope that he and the minister will expedite that intention . secondly , there is no recommitment to the restoration of programmes that have been cut since 2021 , including in yemen , syria , somalia and south sudan , all of which had cuts of more than 50 % , taking several million pounds of their support away . those nations are all suffering significant repercussions from the climate crisis and the fallout from conflict . although i am pleased that women and girls and gender equality are to be put at the centre of bilateral funding , stakeholders have said to me this morning that it is short of the transformative approach espoused by others , including the scottish government . let us not forget that the cuts i just mentioned extended to girls ’ education programmes , which is estimated to have resulted in 700,000 fewer girls receiving an education . that is one of the greatest scandals of our lifetime . finally , i was surprised that there was nothing in the white paper about public perception of international aid and how we can challenge and change it . i have my own thoughts on that , but if most right - thinking people understood the role that their government and their predecessors had played in some of these countries over centuries , and the ongoing legacy of that , they would understand that we have moral obligations . i know the minister agrees , so i would appreciate his assurance that the omission of that point was simply an oversight . i look forward to continuing with the collaborative approach that he has brought to the role . i thank the hon . lady for her party ’s collaboration and for the tone and content of what she said . she mentioned that the 0.7 % figure does not feature extensively in the white paper , but the white paper is about doing development in a different way . we are ratcheting in , through these new mechanisms , billions and billions of pounds , which makes a huge difference . in many ways , it dwarfs the difference between the 0.51 % or 0.52 % that we are spending at the moment , and the 0.7 % . she will have seen at the time of the autumn statement last year that the treasury estimate of when the two fiscal tests would be satisfied was 2028 - 29 — in march , it was 2027 - 28 . all of us hope that the two tests will be satisfied as soon as possible . as far as i am aware , there is no difference between the policy of the government and that of the official opposition on the restoration of the 0.7 % target . she talked about cuts in programmes , but the white paper explains how many of the programmes will be increased . she specifically mentions south sudan . as the budget is now in much better shape , next year the bilateral programme spending in south sudan will increase from £ 47.9 million to £ 110 million , which is an increase of 130 % . the kenyan bilateral programme spending will increase by 225 % and the jordanian one will increase by 130 % . so we are now able to do more through our bilateral programmes . she asked in which areas we would be specifically restoring funding where cuts had been made ; she will see in the white paper that the international citizen service is set to return and our aid match will increase . as for the humanitarian work we will do next year , we expect to spend £ 1 billion on humanitarian relief , plus we have the new resilience and adaptation fund , which will produce an extra 15 % on that . the white paper is long and to many of us it is a most exciting read . a short form is available — i have a copy here — as i mentioned . thanks to the richard curtis team , it is also an excellent read . she chides me for not having made the point about civil society and the platform , but i am delighted to tell her that although i did not mention it in the statement , it is in there ; ukdev — uk international development — is a platform to achieve precisely what she said needs to be achieved in that bridge between civil society and government and state work . may i push back gently on what was said by my right hon . friend is right on that , and of course he was one of the 26 conservative members who voted not to cut the 0.7 % . i hope that he will be energised by the alternative means we have found — the multipliers to ratchet in enormous amounts of money . he is right in what he says about the link between defence , development and diplomacy . when he gets a moment to read to read this white paper , he will be enthused by the lines it is taking . the right hon . gentleman , my constituency neighbour , knows that i admire much about the mission he has set out in this white paper , but chapter 3 needed to say a lot more about the money . he could have said more about doubling the fraction of the special drawing rights we share , as japan is doing , which would have provided an extra £ 4 billion of development assistance . he could have said more about using the money we get back from the european investment bank to invest in building a bigger world bank in order to unlock $ 200 billion of concessional lending over the decade ahead . he could have said more about leading a global initiative to keep the interest rate on special drawing rights down so that the international monetary fund remains as lender of last resort , rather than china . those are practical steps that we could work on together — otherwise we end up with all mission and no model , which will not help the world ’s poorest . if the right hon . gentleman reads with care the chapter to which he referred , he will see that it is one of the most brilliant chapters in it — that is my biased opinion . the reason for that is that we have in washington an extraordinary team of young and brilliant officials who have enormous influence in the world bank , and he is a considerable expert on this area . as for the multipliers and making sure that we sweat the balance sheets of these multilateral banks to ratchet in huge amounts of more money , he will see a great deal to please him . if these reforms are implemented , as i believe they will be , driven hard by britain through the multilateral sector , we will see a vast increase in funding . as for what he says about the sdrs , using them creatively is something we are keen to do . he will recall that at the spring meetings the chancellor of the exchequer announced that britain would use its sdrs to the tune of £ 5.3 billion to elevate the two imf funds that directly deal with poverty and international development . “ people , planet , prosperity ” is summed up entirely in this document , and i commend my right hon . friend on the white paper , particularly chapter 5 , which i am passionate about . building on chapter 3 , it is vital that we accelerate the transition and support the bridgetown initiative . countries are getting terribly frustrated that although the talk is done and the uk is exceptional , there is a need to make sure that banks are getting the money to the people so that the projects can deliver for people , prosperity and planet . i thank my right hon . friend for the tremendous contribution she has made on the matters she is addressing . chapter 5 directly addresses tackling climate change and biodiversity loss , and delivering economic transformation , and i am glad it has her approval . chapter 3 deals with mobilising the money and what i described in my response to my right hon . friend i call the chairperson of the select committee on international development . let me start by giving my huge congratulations to the minister . i hope that the whole house has recognised his personal involvement and the tenacity with which he has got this document out . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] i also congratulate our civil servants , who for the past three years have been doing an amazing job in challenging circumstances . i really hope that this white paper re - establishes our position on the international stage . i particularly welcome the embedding of localism ; more money to the poorest ; debt relief ; and the focus on atrocity prevention . the white paper outlines several initiatives aimed at increasing the amount of climate finance available for vulnerable countries such as small island development states , which is welcome . the minister referenced biodiversity loss a couple of times in his statement , but will he explain why no specific mention is made in the white paper of the loss and damage fund , which i predict will be at the centre of cop28 in the coming weeks ? i thank the chair of the international development committee and , through her , all of its members , who bring their expertise and enthusiasm to this subject with eloquence and skill . she mentions the importance of debt relief and localism , and she is absolutely right on that . she also mentions the work on atrocity prevention , which we have particularly been doing in sudan since the crisis emerged there . that work is very important and we are finding new ways of amplifying it . what she says about biodiversity may well be true . the white paper runs to 148 pages . if she and i had our way , it would have been longer , but we have to draw a line somewhere and i yield to no one on the importance of the point she makes about biodiversity . she will know that there has been argument about loss and damage , and a holding position has now been secured , ahead of the cop . that is very important , but loss and damage must do two things . it must get a broader spectrum of where the money is coming from , otherwise we will just be reorienting it within the international development budget and that will be robbing peter to pay paul — there is no sense in doing that . the other thing is that it must bring in a wider group of countries , not just the narrow oecd ones that account for aid — it must be wider than that . those two things are required to make loss and damage work . i very much welcome this white paper , which reiterates the importance of eliminating gender - based violence . last week i worked with parliamentarians from across the commonwealth , thanks to the commonwealth parliamentary association and my right hon . friend ’s department , and we resolved that there is a real need for international leadership to effectively challenge what are still called cultural norms — things such as forced marriage , female genital mutilation and rape . will he join our calls for eliminating gender - based violence to be at the heart of the commonwealth heads of government meeting in samoa next year ? my right hon . friend makes a very interesting point about the commonwealth heads of government meeting in samoa next year ; i will take that away and see what we can do on the matter . gender - based violence , for the reasons she has often said , is central to what we are doing . we can not understand all these matters unless we see international development through the eyes of girls and women , so she is absolutely right about that . on gender - based violence , she will be well aware of the work led by my noble friend lord ahmad in the other place , which he continues to do with great vigour and success . i welcome the white paper , but i want to put on record very clearly that it is lukewarm and tepid . it shows how much wreckage has been done in the last three years . i welcome the minister moving it forward , but we are not moving forward enough . i have three short questions . first , the minister referred to the prime minister asking him to try to make the merger work . we all know it has been a disaster . it was in the press last week that there was no rationale or reason for it to have happened in the first place . i would like to know why there is no thought put behind restoring that separate department , because it was world - class , and the world looked to it for leadership . secondly , the minister talked about oda being legal . it might be legal , but one third of the budget — over £ 3.7 billion — is being spent on domestic issues of asylum seekers , not on extreme poverty , which he just said is a priority . lastly , to reiterate the point made by the chair of the international development committee , in terms of where the money needs to come from , we need to get behind the make polluters pay programme , which is across the world and is about the largest oil and gas companies that are most responsible for fossil fuels . if we have collective support from this government and governments around the world , we will find the money . on the hon . gentleman ’s last point about loss and damage , i set out the position of the government . some progress was made against expectations a couple of weekends ago . expanding the pool from which the money comes — the payers — perhaps in the way he suggests and trying to find a deeper pool than just the development budget is extremely important . the hon . gentleman ’s second point was about the percentage of the development budget that goes to pay the first - year costs of asylum seekers . he will know that that is absolutely part of the rules on the way in which the budget is administered . we would be asking for a change in the oecd development assistance committee rules , which is very difficult to achieve , as we have to get 30 countries to agree . we decided not to do that . we did get an extra £ 2.5 billion out of the treasury to compensate for it , and he will have noticed that the figure being spent on that has been quite sharply reducing over recent months . the hon . gentleman talked about the merger . my views on the merger before i entered government were fairly lurid , but surely the right thing to do now is to focus on whether we can create an entity that will deliver the global public goods we all support for the 2030s . if we can , that will be building on when we had two departments . i notice that i congratulate my right hon . friend . this is a comprehensive document that contains some really important strategies . i particularly pay tribute to him for the sections on biodiversity , which he knows i regard as enormously important for a variety of reasons . climate change and the restoration of nature are all part of an essential task that the world faces over the coming years . my right hon . friend mentioned civil society , which plays a really important part in all aspects of development . he knows of my involvement in and support for one of africa ’s leading conservation ngos , which does valuable work on the ground in africa . what routes will be available for that organisation and other civil society organisations in the developing world to access the support set out in this white paper ? what channels should they be using ? i thank my right hon . friend for his comments about the importance of nature and biodiversity , which are very prominent in the white paper . he asks how civil society can access support . the section of the white paper about the new platform , ukdev , which i hope he will read with interest , talks about engagement with civil society , but there are a number of programmes that meet his suggestion , including the uk aid match programme . where good charities are using their own money , if the taxpayer puts similar amounts of money alongside that , we are getting two for one — we are getting double the results for the taxpayer ’s money . i echo the words of thanks to the minister for his assiduous engagement , which is incredibly welcome . there is a lot to welcome in this white paper , including the focus on the sdgs and the climate crisis . from our conversations , he will know that the liberal democrats continue to have concerns about the fact that we are not immediately returning to 0.7 % and about the restoration of the department , because this is not just about money — on that we agree ; it is about culture . i met an official in one of our east african embassies who told me that , at the moment , the d in fcdo is silent . while no one would question the minister ’s commitment to this , it must go beyond one man . what are he and his department doing to change the culture within the fcdo , so that the d is no longer a whimper but a roar ? i think the d is a good deal less silent than it was . i thank the hon . lady for what she has said . on the immediate return of the money , she is right ; that is the stated policy of the government and , i think , of the official opposition . on restoring the department , i draw her attention to what one reason the sdgs are off track is that they have not to date recognised that leaving someone behind , whether out of education , a job , healthcare or otherwise , simply on account of their religion or beliefs means they will be poorer . discrimination and persecution are drivers of poverty , affecting millions globally . i warmly congratulate the minister on listening and including clear recognition of this in several places in the white paper , but words need to be turned into action . what action is planned to ensure that religious minorities are taken into account in the design of development assistance programmes and in the forthcoming review of the sdgs ? i am very glad that my hon . friend — who is , after all , the government ’s envoy on these matters — has already read the white paper so assiduously . she will , as she said , have noted that there is a clear commitment to do what she sets out , and i have every confidence that working with her , the government will be able to advance that important agenda . i also add my congratulations and broad support for the progress in the white paper , but may i draw the minister ’s attention to the position in gaza , particularly in relation to humanitarian relief ? on top of the 13,000 civilian deaths , half of whom are children , nearly all power plants , hospitals , and water desalination and sewage plants have been destroyed . does the minister agree that 20 to 30 trucks of humanitarian assistance a day is a drop in the ocean compared with the 450 a day that were being delivered previously , and that what is really needed is a ceasefire and a peace process resulting in a safe and secure palestinian and israeli state ? i think everyone is praying that a peace process will start as soon as possible . we need to get a political track , and as the hon . lady will know , we are pressing for humanitarian pauses to achieve what she wants us to achieve . i provided a statement to the house last week , and indeed the week before ; both went on for an hour and a half and involved 70 members asking questions , so i do not wish to try mr deputy speaker ’s patience by addressing that point directly . however , in the white paper , the hon . lady will be able to see britain ’s commitment to humanitarian relief . the white paper is a great blueprint for the uk to once again be a global leader in the fight against antimicrobial resistance , but as my right hon . friend knows very well , we can not do this alone . will he work with his global counterparts and use the white paper as a platform ahead of the un general assembly high - level meeting on amr , so that we can build the global consensus to tackle it head - on ? my hon . friend is absolutely right about the importance of amr , and we certainly aspire to be a global leader in that area . as he knows , i spoke about amr when i was in new york earlier this year , and we are guided specifically by sally davies , the master of trinity college cambridge and former chief medical officer , who is an expert on this matter . amr is now the world ’s third biggest killer after strokes and heart attacks , and we will be prioritising it in the way that my hon . friend suggests . there is a welcome change of tone in the white paper — the language about partnership , for example , will not be unfamiliar to those of us who have worked with the scotland - malawi partnership for many years . however , in all the “ britain is great ” language , i can not see much recognition of the incredible work that has been done over many years by the devolved administrations , particularly the scottish government , who have ambitions further to the uk government ’s on the empowerment of women and girls and , indeed , loss and damage . can the minister confirm that the work of the devolved administrations in international development , and particularly the work of the scottish government , is recognised , accepted and valued by the uk government , given that they count that spending towards the oda target ? first , i thank the hon . gentleman for his contribution to the white paper , and for bringing the expertise that he deploys in the international development committee to bear on it . we did indeed consult the devolved administrations ; i myself had , i think , two very useful discussions with the government of scotland . as the hon . gentleman knows , i share his view that the work scotland has done in places such as malawi is highly effective . this outstanding white paper focuses on a locally led approach to development because , as the minister has said , co - operation and partnerships are the way forward . as chair of the westminster foundation for democracy , i warmly welcome my right hon . friend ’s commitment to increase grant in aid to the wfd ’s partnerships for fairer , more inclusive , and accountable democratic systems around the world . for the benefit of my right hon . friend and the house , may i also highlight that the cabinet office ’s conflict , security and stability fund recently scored all 103 of its successful bidders , and the wfd came top ? i pay tribute to my hon . friend for the work he does as chair of the westminster foundation for democracy . he will know that the team that put together the white paper looked carefully at what the wfd does , and recognised the unique contribution it makes , supported as it is across the house and in the other place . i am very glad that , following the public accountability process — which , as my hon . friend knows , is going on at the moment — we expect to be able to substantially reinforce the funding for the wfd . like my hon . friend “ will invest further to support women ’s full participation in all political dialogue ” . i place on record my thanks to the foreign affairs select committee for inviting former afghan mp and deputy speaker fawzia koofi to appear before it . what steps is the minister going to take to ensure that full participation ? is he speaking to afghan female leaders here and in afghanistan , and how is that happening in the context of budget cuts in the region ? as the hon . lady knows , next year , we will increase bilateral funding to afghanistan to £ 151 million . we are able to do that because the budget is much more carefully targeted and is now properly cultivated to deliver results . on the subject of education and of the treatment of women and girls in afghanistan , which is absolutely abhorrent , we do everything we can through various mechanisms , including the afghanistan world bank trust fund , to boost those important objectives . as the hon . lady would expect , we focus on trying to win results with that money — which is paid by the british taxpayer — in the best way we possibly can . as this excellent paper sets out , the rise in autocratisation , the rise in humanitarian need , and the row - back of women ’s rights are all terrifying . they are often linked , and it is women ’s voices that are being silenced across the world . a woman ’s right to education , to employment and to contraception are basic , fundamental rights . does my right hon . friend agree that if we really care for the world ’s most vulnerable women , we should set aside our party political differences in this house , and get behind this white paper and make sure its objectives are delivered for women ? my right hon . friend speaks with great wisdom ; from what we have heard today , her final point is clearly being achieved , which is very welcome . what she says about women ’s voices being silenced and their fundamental rights being fettered is , i fear , absolutely right , and the white paper addresses that head - on . we are finding ways of stopping impunity and calling to account those people who abuse human rights in a number of new ways that target accountability , and which i know my right hon . friend — who chairs the all - party parliamentary group on sudan and south sudan — welcomes . i thank the minister for his important statement and white paper . he has stated that humanitarian needs are at their highest level since 1945 , and has also rightly stated that the devastating events in israel and gaza bring home the humanitarian cost of conflict , which was so powerfully expressed by my hon . friend the hon . lady makes an extremely good point about the increase in humanitarian need — as she rightly , says , it has increased significantly — that i set out in my statement . that is why we have found £ 1,000 million to allocate in a budget for tackling humanitarian need next year . if she has a chance to look at the white paper , she will see that it includes the resilience adaptation fund , which is designed to ensure that when crises take place , we can do things such as provide for greater irrigation , water retention and reservoir capacity in a drought , so that in the event that such crises take place again — which , alas , happens all too often — their impact is not as great as before . the hon . lady asks specifically about unrwa . as we know , a very large number of unrwa humanitarian workers have lost their lives , along with others , in the gazan conflict . any attack and any loss of life by a humanitarian worker is deeply to be regretted . those are people who have put themselves in harm ’s way for fellow members of humanity . they are unarmed and just trying to do good to their fellow citizens . on the humanitarian need overall , climate change has particularly exacerbated that , and it is of course the poorest who are hit first and hardest , as the white paper emphasises . the lack of water , sanitation and hygiene facilities in developing countries particularly affects women , especially during childbirth , when they are routinely prescribed prophylactic antibiotics , and a greater number of women suffer from urinary tract infections when toilet facilities are absent . what discussions will the minister have with partners at cop28 to further the wash — water , sanitation and hygiene — agenda ? i anticipate , along with my colleagues , having many such discussions , and not only at cop but in other fora . my hon . friend is entirely right that the absence of water and hygiene facilities hits girls in particular and stops many from going to school . he will know that education can not wait — an international fund strongly supported by the british taxpayer , to which we allocated £ 80 million earlier this year — is able directly to help people caught up in conflict in that way . we want them to go to school and they often can not do so , for the reasons he has given , and education can not wait tries to alleviate that directly . i welcome the white paper and commend the minister for his persistence on this issue . does he agree that , in order to maintain public support for programmes such as those outlined in the white paper , we need to clamp down vigorously on any misappropriation of funds — in the past that has happened in some of these nations — so that the money goes to those who need it , not those who have easier access to it ? the hon . member is right to make it clear that corruption is the cancer in international development spending . that is why we always ensure that , if there is any hint of that , we intervene immediately to stop it . it is also one of the reasons why we so seldom work directly through budget support , where we can not track so easily the way taxpayers ’ money is being spent , but allocate very directly in a way that we — and , more importantly , the independent commission for aid impact — can properly hold to account . i , like the minister , find this white paper to be an enlightening and exciting read . it goes a long way to setting out our stall for what we want to do on international development , and i commend the civil servants and special advisers for their work on it . it identifies localism , partnership and transparency as being at its core , but could the minister just say a little more about mobilising finance through british international investment , and whether more risk needs to be taken in less economically developed countries ? as chair of a group supported by halo and of the conservative friends of international development , i also welcome the focus on conflict prevention and the opportunities to build resilience and adaptation . could the minister please say a little more about that , and how this fund is going to work to help in those areas ? i am not remotely surprised that my hon . friend has already read the whole paper — all 148 pages . it is two pages shorter than the white paper produced in 2009 , but i beg to suggest that it is a rather better read . on bii , we have taken the advice of the select committee , recognising that it could do more in the poorest and most difficult countries . bii is investing in a port in somalia , which , as he will understand , is quite a gritty thing to do , but we will see the funding to the poorest countries from bii rise in the period to 2030 from about 38 % to 50 % . that is a very significant increase , and one that the select committee has urged us to embrace . halo is a brilliant charity that does work far beyond just dealing with high explosives , and we give it our strong support . the white paper ’s focus on fragile and conflict - affected states is to be welcomed , but the minister will know that , due to their very nature , these can be the most difficult places to operate in . will he commit to reporting annually to the house so that we can monitor progress on the strategy ? conflict - affected and fragile states are indeed the most difficult places in which to operate , but they are also two of the most important types of place in which to operate . the hon . member will be interested to know that , while over half of the development budget goes to the least developed countries , something like 62 % goes to fragile and conflict - affected states . there is no doubt that the select committee and icai will ensure that the focus he requests is maintained . i welcome the minister ’s statement and the white paper . having had just one or two months to speak to my constituents , i know that many of them felt a real sense of dismay about the lack of global action and national leadership on these issues . the welcome return to the focus on the development goals and recognition of the importance of co - ordinated action on the causes and consequences of climate change globally will go down very well with many of my constituents . although i welcome the recognition of the challenges posed by the barriers to finance and the burden of debt mentioned in the white paper and the minister ’s remarks , i fear that a lack of ambition in this area may undermine some of the goals set out today . can the minister commit to bringing forward in due course further legislative action to ensure that we tackle that burden appropriately , including on private finance , and so have the real ambition we need to see on this agenda ? ambition is not lacking , but driving these things forward takes an enormous amount of time and is subject to international co - operation , as the hon . member suggests . however , if he looks at british leadership on climate resilient debt clauses , for example — we introduced them and uk export finance , which is the export credits guarantee department of the british government , is championing them — he will see that these clauses make an enormous difference . for example , if the government of ghana are hit by a pandemic , they need all their liquidity to look after their own citizens , but they have to pay interest and capital on their debt . what these clauses mean is that they would get a two - year window during which they can spend their liquidity on their own citizens . that is a small but vital and very impactful innovation . britain has produced these clauses , and we have done the right thing on that . the minister is absolutely right to say that international development and climate change are inseparable , and i commend him for his work in this area . however , many of my constituents have written to me to express frustration about how little the government are doing at home to attain the sustainable developing goals , and they rightly ask how we can ask other countries to do what we are not doing ourselves . so what does the minister think i should say to my constituents who are so concerned about the absence of any measures in the king ’s speech against fossil fuels and about tackling poverty at home ? the hon . and learned member will have seen the huge commitment that britain has made through the green climate fund internationally . i think that we can be very proud of the leadership that we are giving through the green climate fund , of which we are now the co - chair . on uk achievement of the sdgs , she may recall that in 2019 there was an audit of how britain was doing . britain came out very well from that audit , and we will of course have a further audit in due course . i very much welcome the minister ’s commitment to ensuring that women and girls have the same opportunities within the labour market as men . that could potentially add trillions of pounds more to global gdp in 2025 . what steps will and can the minister take to ensure that women and girls internationally have the means necessary to improve the societies they live in and to accelerate their development , which we all wish to see ? the former foreign secretary unveiled britain ’s new women and girls strategy in sierra leone this year . it is a very good read — if i may add it to the hon . member ’s reading on international development . i was not an unalloyed fan of the merger , as he knows , but when i got back into the government i saw that the foreign office had completely internalised the importance of putting girls and women right at the centre of everything we do in this area , and it is to be commended for that . the minister is exactly right to say that little development happens in the absence of security . speaking in 2014 , before he joined the government and during israel ’s operation protective edge , he said that a ceasefire in gaza should be made permanent before talks move on to addressing wider issues in the middle east peace process . does he now agree that talks addressing the underlying grievances of the moderates would be part of a successful counter - insurgency campaign , part of bringing about greater security , and hence would foster international development in the middle east ? the quote that the hon . gentleman found from 2014 was made in very different circumstances , but he is right to say that development will almost always fail where there is no security . indeed , as sir paul collier memorably said , conflict is “ development in reverse ” . on the middle east and gaza — that is not , of course , the subject of the statement , mr deputy speaker — the sooner we can move to a political track in the region , at the united nations and in the international assemblies , and start working on what a future two - state solution would look like , with a state for both israel and palestine , the better . that concludes the statement on the international development white paper . i thank the minister for yet another marathon question and answer session . with permission , mr deputy speaker , i wish to update the house on the work that the government are doing to ensure that our welfare services for veterans are fit for the future . under this prime minister , what it feels like to be a veteran has fundamentally transformed , with the introduction of defined pathways for veterans to access support , including with housing and healthcare , backed by record amounts of government funding . as we continue to pave the way forward , we knew the time was right to look back and consider carefully the efficiency and effectiveness of pre - existing services , including some services under the banner of veterans uk . that is why in march this year my right hon . friend the minister for defence people , veterans and service families and i informed the house that we had commissioned an independent review into a total of seven bodies , including the veterans welfare service , defence transition services and veterans ’ gateway , which i was pleased was published in full in july . the welfare services review contained recommendations to improve and simplify welfare provision for veterans across a variety of channels , and it marked the first time that those services had been considered in the round , looking at their role , scope and breadth . the minister for defence people , veterans and service families and i welcome the review ’s findings as an important step in making the uk the best place in the world to be a veteran . the government have already committed to responding formally to the review by the end of the year , but members of the house and their constituents rightly expect an update from me on what progress we have made so far . i am therefore delighted to announce that the government accept the principles behind the vast majority of the review ’s 35 strategic and operational recommendations . thanks to close collaboration between the ministry of defence and the office for veterans ’ affairs , i am pleased to update the house on how this government are taking decisive steps to deliver a number of the review ’s recommendations . first , the “ veterans uk ” branding will be retired in 2024 , with the government announcing a replacement in due course . indeed , as the review acknowledged , staff involved in delivering welfare services for veterans sincerely care about their work , but sometimes analogue processes have historically hampered the level of service provided . with initiatives such as the government digitalisation programme , backed by £ 40 million of government funding , we are confident that the experience of service users will be genuinely transformed . the retirement of the “ veterans uk ” branding marks a clean break from the past , and represents a vital step forward in regaining trust between the service and its users . secondly , the word “ veterans ” will be removed from the title of the minister for defence people , veterans and service families — the title will be renamed “ minister for defence people and families ” . we agree with the review ’s recommendation that that will provide clarity about the responsibility for co - ordinating veterans policy across government . indeed , although the mod will continue to provide support — including on pensions and compensation , on transition from service for veterans and their families , and beyond transition on issues resulting from service — the change to the ministerial title further clarifies that the primary duty for co - ordinating veterans policy across government sits with the office for veterans ’ affairs , at the heart of government in the cabinet office , and with me as the minister for veterans ’ affairs reporting directly to the prime minister in cabinet . thirdly , i can announce that the ova is currently exploring options for transforming veterans ’ gateway , which has already had more than one million visits to its online guides . the house will be pleased to know that we have recently launched a refresh project for the gateway , and are in the process of bringing the service into central government , within the office for veterans ’ affairs , ensuring that the gateway delivers streamlined access to the plethora of support available to veterans . tied into that work , the ministry of defence and the office for veterans ’ affairs will jointly assess the relationship between veterans ’ gateway and veterans uk helplines . we will be mindful throughout of the need to simplify how veterans access support , and ensure that veterans who are unable to access services online , or who have more complex needs , are still supported . finally , the welfare services review will , alongside the veterans and advisory pensions committees act 2023 , contribute to clarifying the future role of the vapcs in a way that supports the government ’s vision for veterans ’ welfare services . today puts us yet another step closer to delivering on this government ’s ambition to make the uk the best country in the world to be a veteran . i pay particular tribute to the review team , the independent veterans adviser , and all 150 contributors to this review , for the considerable amount of work that went into producing the report in a relatively short space of time . i look forward to publishing the government ’s full response to the review later in the year , and to ensuring that our welfare services for veterans and their families , service leavers and the bereaved community , are as efficient and effective as possible . this country has an unwavering duty to those who put their life on the line for our freedom . as today ’s statement demonstrates , this government are committed and determined to discharge that duty with the honour and respect that our courageous ex - service personnel deserve , and i commend this statement to the house . i thank the minster for advance sight of the statement . labour is deeply proud of our veterans , and for the enormous contribution they have made and continue to make to our country . there was not very much in that statement , but what there is i can welcome . there seem to be two bits of rebranding , and two things that the minister should already be doing , and that seems to be about it . i was expecting the minister to have published the full government response to the independent review of uk government welfare services for veterans , instead of a statement that is just designed to look busy . when can we expect that government response ? it is due by the end of the year , but we are already in late november so there is not much time left . as we head into the winter months , the conservatives are still failing to deliver the support that our veterans and their families deserve . this review is long overdue , but ministers have been responsible for worsening veterans ’ services over the past 13 years . they have created a postcode lottery for veteran support , they have cut employment support for veterans , and they have continued to make little progress in the slow roll - out of veterans ’ id cards . as temperatures drop , the cost of living crisis is going to be tough on families across the country , and our veterans are no exception . people are worried about how they can afford to pay bills , and many could be making that horrific choice between heating and eating , as many did last year and the year before . this is why it is essential that they are able to access the services and support they need here and now . the veterans ’ welfare system can feel “ almost impenetrable ” for those seeking support . it is “ overwhelming and off - putting ” leading to a “ distrust of the ministry of defence and veterans uk ” . those are not my words ; they are the damning conclusions of the independent review . our veterans do not need empty promises . they need action . as there was not much in today ’s statement , we are left with more questions than answers — and here are some more . when will the government design and articulate a single strategy for veterans ’ welfare services , and will that be inclusive of family members and the bereaved ? what steps are being taken to prepare personnel throughout their entire military career for civilian life , not just as they come into the transition timeframe ? will the mod commission a review of tri - service welfare support provision , with a particular focus on transition and the wider discharge welfare provision processes ? paragraph 4.7 of the independent review states that casework management in veterans welfare services is not fit for purpose due to “ a significant ( and out - dated ) reliance on paper records ” , and a lack of interoperability with other mod it systems . i therefore welcome the introduction of the £ 40 million digitisation programme that has previously been announced , but will the minister tell us what proportion of that is being spent on veterans ’ welfare services and in what timeframe ? will that end the outdated reliance on paper records that was made clear in the independent review ? paragraph 4.18 of the review says that welfare managers are “ over - stretched ” , and paragraph 4.19 says that they are “ fundamentally … not professionally trained to undertake these roles ” , which are part financial adviser , part trauma caseworker , and part social worker , which is “ in stark contrast to … the charity sector ” and has contributed to “ a high turnover of staff in recent years ” . what is the minister doing to address the training needs and capacity shortages ? it was disappointing that the content - light king ’s speech contained no new legislation to put the armed forces covenant on to the statute book . labour has been clear that in government we would fully incorporate the armed forces covenant into law . why does the minister not agree with us on that ? why does he oppose that labour policy ? we all understand that veterans ’ identity cards will speed up access to services , but throughout the last year the minister has used various language , which has changed , about when he will hit the targets for delivering them . this time last year , he promised that by summer 2023 all veterans should have received a veterans ’ id card . in april , he moved the goalposts , saying that it would be completed “ by the end of the year ” . now , as we approach the end of the year , he is claiming that he is delivering on the promise , but not every veteran has an id card . when will they ? labour is deeply proud of our veterans . they deserve better than ministers repeatedly breaking promises , moving the goalposts and failing to deliver the welfare support that our former service personnel and their families deserve . the next labour government will stand side by side with veterans and their families , because we are a party committed to fulfilling the important promises our society makes to those who serve . the conservatives like to talk up their support to veterans , but it is clear — very much like today ’s statement — that although there are a lot of words , there is not always a lot of substance . i will be brief , because i am afraid that whenever the hon . member rises to talk about veterans , he simply demonstrates his vast lack of knowledge in veterans ’ affairs . he asked me questions that he knows , or he should know , are questions not for me but for the ministry of defence . for example , how we prepare people when they are in service is nothing to do with veterans ’ affairs and veterans ’ services . if he wants to stand up in the house and say that veterans ’ services have got worse over the last two , three , five or seven years , that is fine , but everybody listening and watching knows that he is simply trying to make a political point and play politics with veterans . i will not waste the house ’s time by going into too many of his points . i have been consistent on veterans ’ id cards . i ask him to look at this and write to me with a time when i ever said that every veteran would have their id card by the summer of this year . that never happened , and it is important that in this house we do not say things — inadvertently — that may not be correct . we are delivering id cards by the end of the year , which was always the promise . by january , we will be printing 10,000 a month , and the veterans i speak to are happy with the process . the hon . member asked plenty of questions that do not relate to the statement or this area . again , i implore the opposition to move away from glib statements about veterans . they need to intellectually apply themselves to how policy can change to improve the lives of veterans . there is a desert on the opposition benches , and that is deeply disappointing . i thank the minister for his statement . he will recall that last year the all - party parliamentary group on veterans did a survey on veterans uk , and i hope that survey played a small part in the statement . what is his vision for what comes after veterans uk ? i pay tribute to my hon . friend for all the work that he has championed over many years in the appg , along with all its members . he has specifically focused on veterans uk . the ambition is to make it far clearer and easier to navigate and understand the functions of veterans uk , and simultaneously to improve outcomes . the quinquennial review into armed forces compensation , which will report by the end of the year , tied into the full response to the veterans ’ welfare review and will go into detail about some of those issues . i would like to put on the record my sincere thanks to all the staff who work at veterans uk . i will always rally hard in their defence , because i have been there myself and seen how hard they work . they genuinely care and they are committed , but the resource envelope that they operate in has not been good enough for a long time . the government have changed that , and i am proud of that , as it will change what it means to be a veteran in the uk . i call the snp spokesperson . i thank the minister for the statement , but he can not escape from the fact that this is quite thin gruel . it amounts to a rebranding exercise , and i can not think of many veterans who will be excited about what he said . there is a cost of living crisis , and what veterans want to hear from the minister for veterans ’ affairs is what he is doing , or what lobbying he is undertaking , to have practical steps put in place to help them right now . nothing was said about that , despite that being a matter most pressing for so many veterans who are finding it hard to secure the dignity in retirement to which they should have a right . the minister said that veterans must be given the recognition they deserve because they have put their lives on the line on our behalf . he also said that he wants to simplify welfare provision for veterans , yet we continue to see too many veterans struggling to pay for essentials . i am sure he will say that that is not a matter directly for him , but i am keen to hear what lobbying he is undertaking — with his cabinet colleagues and the prime minister , to whom he reports directly — on their behalf . this goes to the heart of veterans ’ welfare , which is surely his business . in the 2021 census , 1 million uk veterans were aged over 65 , and an estimated 146,000 were eligible for pension credit , but , by treating military compensation awards as income , some of our poorest veterans and their families are pushed beyond the pension credit threshold and missing out on thousands of pounds of support that other civilians can access . of course , that extends beyond national support and includes benefits paid out by councils such as housing benefit , council tax support , discretionary housing payments and disabled facilities grants . when i raised that in the chamber yesterday , the minister for defence people , veterans and service families told me that compensation is calculated with an understanding of how it will interact with welfare benefits . i must tell the minister that the mod has not said that before , and that has not been understood heretofore by the british legion . perhaps he could explain why compensation incurred as a result of service in the line of duty is not included in mean - tested benefits for civil servants but is for veterans . will he support — i get the gist of the question . when it comes to issues that affect the veteran community and what is going on in that space , these are not just ideas that come from ministers or others sitting around and thinking , “ what is the most important thing for veterans ? ” cost of living support is one of them , and that is why a number of funds are available . the royal british legion has done a terrific job on that over the winter , and the office for veterans ’ affairs leans into the armed forces covenant trust fund money as well . consistently , the no . 1 issue in veterans ’ affairs over the last seven years has been the identification of military service among the service charities . that is why between the ministry of defence and the ova we have put so much effort and resource into delivering on our promises on veterans ’ id cards . the hon . member raises a legitimate point about the royal british legion ’s current campaign on separating allocations of income for armed forces compensation scheme awards or similar . we will look at what can be done on that , and we are meeting representatives of the royal british legion — i think before christmas — to work out what is the art of the possible . but i am afraid that i do not agree with her assertion that life is a misery as a veteran in this country . things have improved exponentially in the last seven to 10 years . never have opportunities or the support available been like they are now , but we continue to work hard . i always listen to the veterans community and work hard to ensure that we meet that need . from his maiden speech onwards , the minister has relentlessly promoted the cause of service veterans , and the whole house should be grateful to him for it . even longer in their service are tremendously experienced charities such as veterans aid in victoria , under the inspirational leadership of dr hugh milroy . to what extent is government strategy drawing on the vast experience of such organisations , which know so much about the frontline issues faced by veterans who fall on hard times or even into destitution ? i pay huge tribute to the charities in this space . i know the work of veterans aid , and hugh does a terrific job down there . the key in all this work is collaboration . nobody will deliver this by themselves . the expertise in the charity sector is unrivalled . in op courage , we have delivered a dedicated mental health care pathway for veterans , which is commissioned centrally but delivered by different charitable partners all over the united kingdom . it works for the government , because we know that the services are happening ; it works for individuals , because they know that a service is available for them ; and it works for the vital charities in the sector , which can have longer - term contracts . we are doing that on homelessness : op fortitude has set up a network of wraparound service provision to end homelessness this christmas . i know that there is always more to do , and i would love to see veterans aid and to catch up with where it is with its work . the minister has recently been shown evidence that blood testing was carried out on servicemen in the ’ 50s and ’ 60s — testing that the mod denied existed . his response was to say that he could not do anything and that the nuclear veterans should sue the mod . to dismiss those veterans in that way is a dereliction of his duty as veterans minister , is it not ? i recognise the politicisation of the campaign on nuclear test veterans . the truth is that no one has done more than those on the government benches to deliver that medal , more than 70 years later , to our veterans who served . there is no cover up ; i have worked extensively with the minister for defence people , veterans and service families to uncover records in this space . some records were taken , some were not . there is no cover - up policy to discriminate against that cohort . it is simply does not exist . what would be the reason to cover it up rather than look after these people ? i have travelled halfway round the world to fiji to meet them , to look after them , to give them their medals and to try to support them . i rally against the politicisation of this veterans cohort , who will of course continue to drive down this space . we all have a responsibility to act maturely and to ensure that they receive the answers they deserve after a very long time . i welcome the minister ’s statement . last year , i ran my first half marathon to raise money for forces in the community , a broxtowe charity that supports veterans through all walks of life . such small organisations do life - changing work and desperately need our support . will the minister lay out what support is in place for small organisations such as forces in the community ? of course . the armed forces covenant fund trust is fantastic in that regard . it is an independent body that receives at least £ 10 million a year from the government to support vital charities and what they are doing . the charity space is made up of large and small charities , and they are all equally important . they save lives and work on the frontline every day . i pay tribute to my hon . friend and his fundraising , and to all colleagues across the house who support veterans charities , which are a vital part of delivering this nation ’s commitment to our armed forces veterans . i am sure that we are united in this house in wanting to secure the best outcome for veterans . an important part of that is remembering their service and ensuring that we never forget the sacrifices that they made on behalf of our country . i am conscious that the minister is sitting next to the minister for defence people , veterans and service families , who knows a little more about commemoration , but he will also know that we are very privileged to still have some veterans from operation overlord and operation market garden . on behalf of the government , will he say what work is under way to ensure that there will be a fitting 80th anniversary tribute to them next year ? i pay tribute to the relentless way that the hon . member provides a voice to veterans in his community and across the country . next year is an incredibly important year . while we contemporise remembrance , as we did this year in the way we changed the parade and such things , we are incredibly privileged to have people still with us who experienced a conflict that none of us could ever imagine . they are a living and breathing example . the government are determined to honour that in the correct fashion next year . i look forward to sharing those plans with him in due course . i had cause to raise problems with the uk ’s handling of some stroud veterans , particularly those with complex cases , and i thank the minister for his time in that regard . i can see what an extremely difficult but necessary step the fearless minister has taken in relation to vuk in his quest to help veterans . will he talk through the transition period towards the new services , particularly to reassure anybody who is already involved with vuk , and expand on the veterans ’ gateway timeline and approach ? i pay tribute to my hon . friend for championing these issues over many years . retiring the brand of vets uk may seem like a small thing to people who do not know much about veterans . in the veterans community , it is a massive moment to retire that brand and look at what the organisation does in relation to the office for veterans ’ affairs . we need to make sure that it does what it says on the tin for our bereaved families and delivers an improved service through the maturity of these reviews , which will be delivered by the end of the year . veterans ’ gateway was a fantastic idea when it came in , and it has been run very well by the royal british legion over many years , but i have always had an ambition for it to do more . i have a vision of everything being in the palm of your hand in future , so people can go somewhere like veterans ’ gateway to access support , submit an armed forces compensation scheme application or geolocate support services in the community . it is an exciting vision and we can only do that by bringing it back into government . it is now back in government . we are working on those plans , and i will have more to say on that development in due course . veterans and their families are twice as likely to be unpaid carers or in receipt of sickness or disability benefits . some of the announcements being trailed ahead of tomorrow ’s autumn statement have indicated that benefits might see a real - terms cut . it has been suggested the benefits might be increased by 4.6 % rather than 6.7 % to reflect the october inflation figure rather than the usual september one . has the minister discussed with department for work and pensions or treasury colleagues how the trailed changes might affect veterans and their families ? i have not , and i will not comment on anything to do with tomorrow ’s autumn statement . i welcome the statement from my right hon . friend and his work on behalf of veterans across the whole united kingdom . he takes very seriously the impact on their families , particularly those who have lost loved ones fighting for their country . a lot of good work has been done by the ministry of defence and the uk government on the war widow ’s pension issue , but i have been contacted by constituents who are concerned that things have changed somewhat since the original announcement in may , and a significant proportion of the fewer than 400 women may not get the money they were expecting from the uk government . will he agree to take that back to the department to look again ? i work closely with my ministry of defence colleagues on that . i started working in 2017 and 2018 , and then in 2019 as a minister , on some sort of recognition of war widows . i am pleased with the work of the minister for defence people , veterans and service families and with the ex - gratia payment we have ended up with . that will never replace a pension and it does not value what has been lost on behalf of the nation , but it is designed to recognise that . the government are clear that that should be available to everyone who is entitled to it , and i will work with my ministry of defence colleagues to address the points that my hon . friend raised . it is estimated that some 60,000 ex - service personnel are victims of frozen pension arrangements because they have chosen to live abroad . whatever the government ’s position on frozen pensions generally , surely these people could and should be treated as a special case . given the minister ’s responsibility for co - ordinating veterans policy across government , does he agree that they are a special case and will he represent their concerns across government ? this is an incredibly difficult issue , with which i am familiar . i have just been on a visit to australia , where it was raised with me in person . the truth is that this is a treasury policy area . i recognise that individuals who leave the country want to see their pensions uprated . that is not current policy , but i will always advocate for veterans to be a special case . i continue to make those representations every day that i am in government . i agree with the minister that these issues really should not be politicised . i came into the house nearly 20 years ago . i grew up in an army city , hereford , and i now represent a constituency in shropshire . when i came in 20 years ago , there was a lot less provision for veterans in every single aspect of what the minister outlined today . i commend the fact that the government are supporting the majority of the 35 strategic and operational recommendations in the review . i put on record my thanks to all the staff and volunteers at the royal british legion - backed battle back centre for wounded veterans in lilleshall in my constituency . may i take this opportunity to say that he has an open invitation to visit ? that is very kind . i try to get around as many such centres as possible . the rbl has done an incredible job over many years with a lot of battle back centres . my right hon . friend is absolutely right . i became a member of parliament after my experiences in conflict in 2006 , 2008 , 2009 and 2010 . i am here now in 2023 and veterans ’ care has been transformed , whichever way we look at it . on dedicated pathways for mental health and physical health , ending homelessness , the criminal justice system and sector initiatives into employment , there has never been a better time to be a veteran . however , we continue to press hard , because we want to make this the best country in the world to be a veteran . i am absolutely determined that we will get there . simply rebranding veterans uk seems like a superficial move . i am not clear how just changing the name recognises the deep problems that exist in that set - up . what assurances can the minister give the house and the many veterans who contact me regularly that there will be a root - and - branch review to ensure that existing complaints are dealt with and that veterans receive the service they richly deserve ? i am just looking over my statement again and at no stage have i said that this is a rebranding exercise . the veterans uk brand is being retired , absolutely , but that is not a rebranding exercise , because then we would have come forward with something else that would be exactly the same . the overarching organisation is being removed , as well as the interrelationships under that between the bereavement services , the compensation services and the welfare services that operate out of norcross . look , if people want to take it as a rebrand , that ’s fine . i have not said that and that is not what it is going to mean for veterans , but if it fits their narrative , that ’s fine by me . i welcome the statement , but not as much as i welcome my right hon . and gallant friend ’s role and his enthusiasm to continue to undertake it . that role did not exist under previous administrations . we all know there is nothing worse than seeing a veteran on the street begging . recently , i came across a man called danny at edgware road tube station and he was indeed begging . i wrote to the minister with danny ’s contact details and i am eternally grateful that danny is now getting the support he deserves , but i do not believe that he should have had to beg for that . i look forward to the government ’s response to the review to ensure that it does not take a member of parliament to write to a minister in the cabinet office to get the support that people not only deserve but require . first , i pay tribute to my hon . friend for bringing that case to us . i also pay tribute to those in my private office who work on individual cases like that for veterans every single day and change lives . that is what has happened in danny ’s case . i do not want to see any veteran sleeping rough because of a lack of provision . under this government , we will end that by this christmas through op fortitude , a dedicated pathway out of homelessness , with 910 supported housing placements and £ 8.5 million . we are incredibly proud of it . on the point about this position not existing before , i welcome any political debate around veterans . there is a new shadow minister talking about veterans today ; the other one is not here any more . there is no commitment to follow through on what we have done with the office for veterans ’ affairs . i have no idea why the labour party would want to seek a fight on veterans ’ affairs . we just want the country to look after them and i think labour needs to have another look at that tactic . let me say on behalf of the people right across chesterfield that we have an absolute respect for the role played by veterans . i know that people across my constituency want veterans to get the support they need . we have an organisation in derbyshire , stand to , which does fantastic work in providing veterans ’ support services . i will be writing to that organisation following this statement . i was expecting to be writing to say that the government were now in a position to provide their response to the review . from what the minister has been able to say today , he seems keen to make the point that this not just a rebranding exercise ; veterans uk is being stood down , but there will be a replacement . can he say any more about what will actually replace it , so i can put that in the letter that i am writing to stand to ? what i try to do in this space is set the objectives . we all know the problems around veterans uk : the lack of accountability , and the challenges the staff face through the lack of resourcing and the lack of digitisation . we have set out where we want better outcomes , for example in the compensation space . we have set those objectives and what it comes back with we will implement . it will all be tied into the veterans ’ gateway . we have an ambition that no one comes in through the wrong front door , does not have to tell their story a number of times , and receives the care and compensation they deserve for their service , but that is a journey and not something i can implement overnight . i know colleagues know this , but it is clear from having conversations with anybody in the veterans space about veterans uk that it is not where i want it to be . that is what today is about : acknowledging those challenges and understanding why they exist . that has nothing to do with the staff , who have worked incredibly hard over many years but have been traditionally under - resourced by governments of all colours . they now have a new resource envelope and a real opportunity to deliver professional veterans care , which is what this is all about . i thank the minister for his statement and for his ongoing work to support veterans right across the united kingdom . the minister will be aware that new research from queen ’s university belfast has found that northern ireland veterans who have been exposed to traumatic events and experienced barriers to care have increased levels of ptsd symptoms and diagnosis . what further assurances can the minister give me that the needs of veterans who served in northern ireland will be supported , given those findings ? i am led to believe that the minister will be visiting northern ireland . he would be most welcome in my constituency to visit some of those veterans in the not too distant future . i thank the hon . lady for her continued advocacy in this space . as everybody knows , levelling up what it means to be a veteran in northern ireland has been absolutely critical to the government ’s work , whether through the very , very difficult legacy bill or the northern ireland veterans support office . the nivso is the first directly funded workstream of £ 500,000 coming out of the office for veterans ’ affairs , which we are working with the veterans commissioner over there to deliver . there are key areas in the veterans ’ ecosystem that are delivered by devolved authorities and we respect that . all we are asking is that all veterans get the standard they deserve and i am determined we will get there in northern ireland . i am going to northern ireland again on 4 and i thank the minister for the update . i wonder if he would listen to this voice from the desert from east durham . can i draw his attention to the terrific work the east durham veterans trust does to provide mental health support , counselling and advice ? it is a much neglected area . indeed , the minister ’s colleague who is no longer in her place , you will not find me arguing against more time off , mr deputy speaker ! i am always fighting for better services in the veterans space , and i will take that idea of a veterans bank holiday away with me . when it comes to the issue of mental health , the hon . gentleman is entirely right . some small groups have done extraordinary work on the frontline over many years , sitting with veterans throughout the night when no one else is awake or watching , and plugging them into services . we have transformed mental health care services through op courage , spending between £ 22 million and £ 24 million a year , and there were 19,000 referrals in its first year . there is still a massive amount of unmet need , but we are determined to drive that down so that all these groups feel connected and plugged into services . it is my mission to ensure that no veteran , especially when poorly , does not know where to turn , and i will not rest until we get there . i welcome the minister ’s statement . his understanding of veterans ’ issues has been nurtured by his service in the army but also by his nature , which leads him to try to help people who are less well off , and i appreciate that very much . i understand that just in the past week his department has been able to assist people on whose behalf i have been acting for some time , and i thank him for that as well . last month it was announced that the office for veterans ’ affairs would be providing about half a million pounds of pilot funding to level up medical and welfare services for veterans in northern ireland . can the minister confirm that all those veterans — every one of them — will qualify for the funding , and that there is no criterion relating to length of service that they will have to meet in order to gain access to the right care ? there is no criterion of that kind . the qualification in this country for being a veteran is 24 hours ’ service . we can disagree on whether that is a good thing or a bad thing , but it is the basis of the allocation and all the data that we have had to collect over the last few years to understand what the veterans cohort is actually like . i am not sure what sort of exclusions the hon . gentleman is referring to — he may wish to speak to me offline — but i have rallied hard against the way in which the politics changes in these things . individuals ’ commitment to the nation is unwavering . there is a standard to which we will adhere when it comes to looking after them following their service , irrespective of where they served in the united kingdom , and i pay tribute to the hon . gentleman for helping us to deliver that over the years . on a point of order , mr deputy speaker . during justice questions , i sought to ask a question about the comments reported to have been made recently by a district judge in walsall magistrates court . while i do not wish to question the authority of mr speaker , it is my understanding that the judge in question was not one of those covered by the categories described in paragraph 21.23 of “ erskine may ” . can you advise me , therefore , on how i can receive a reply to my question ? i am grateful to the right hon . and learned gentleman for giving notice of his point of order . mr speaker has , i understand , reviewed the question and is content for it to be answered . further to that point of order , mr deputy speaker . i thank my right hon . and learned friend for his perfectly proper question , and i want to reassure him that we have listened to it and the lord chancellor will be writing to him in due course . on a point of order , mr deputy speaker . it has recently been announced that owing to its perilous financial position , derbyshire county council has asked the department for transport to pause its plans for the staveley regeneration route bypass . that would mean that £ 140 million of government money would not be available to us in chesterfield for a much needed bypass because of the financial problems of derbyshire county council . obviously the decision was not made by the department for transport , mr deputy speaker , but i wonder whether you have been notified of any plans for a statement to be made in the house about the proposed change . if not , how we can ensure that the council and the department work together to ensure that this important route still goes ahead ? the hon . gentleman is fully aware that that is not a matter for the chair , but i can say that i have received no indication of any statement to be made this afternoon . the hon . gentleman ’s point is a matter of record , it has been heard , and it will be for those on the front bench to decide whether and how they wish to respond . second reading [ relevant documents : fifth report of the welsh affairs committee of session 2022–23 , broadcasting in wales , hc 620 , twelfth report of the culture , media and sport committee of session 2022–23 , draft media bill : radio measures , hc 1287 ; thirteenth report of the culture , media and sport committee of session 2022–23 , draft media bill : final report , hc 1807 ; and the government response to both reports , hc 155 . ] 2.24 pm i beg to move , that the bill be read a second time . i am especially pleased to do so today , as it is world television day . the british media are world renowned . they inform and educate , they challenge and entertain . content created by our media , be it journalistic exclusives or broadcasting endeavours , attracts domestic and international audiences and helps to drive our creative economy . however , the world in which this content is competing is changing rapidly . technology has transformed every facet of our lives , and nowhere is that more evident than in the way we watch and consume television and listen to the radio . we have seen the rise of streaming giants and on - demand content , youtube and smartphones , tablets and tiktok , and all those have combined to reshape our whole broadcasting landscape . today , that landscape is unrecognisable in the context of what followed the last major reform of the rules that governed broadcasting in 2003 . we need to support the british media to enable them to compete and continue to serve their audiences with high - quality content . we need regulations fit for the digital age , and that is what this media bill will give us . in keeping with the government ’s defining mission , the bill makes long - term decisions for a brighter future for our viewers , our listeners and our public service broadcasters . it is a pro - growth bill that is designed to level the playing field for public service broadcasters such as the bbc , channel 4 , stv and itv , among others , so that they can continue to provide first - class content and reach their audiences . as members will know , we have engaged heavily with all parts of industry , from the streamers to the independent production sector and our public service broadcasters , to get the bill right , and if we want our broadcasters to be ready for the next wave of technology , it is imperative that we get it right . as the minister says , the bill marks a time of huge change in broadcasting and what have you , but the specific concern in scotland , especially in my part of the world , is that while it mentions and makes provision for s4c , gaelic broadcasting seems to have been omitted from it . i am sure that that is just an oversight , and that during the bill ’s later stages we will see safeguards in place for gaelic broadcasting and bbc alba in particular . i recognise the great contribution made by gaelic speakers . we have agreed that we will , in the first instance , bring together the bbc and scottish government officials to discuss the co - ordination of funding decisions for gaelic language production between the two organisations . we considered funding arrangements for minority language broadcasting , including programming for the gaelic language , at the previous charter review , and those arrangements will be considered again at the next review . i am sure the minister will acknowledge the immense importance of public sector broadcasting to the welsh language . how will she ensure that the bill reflects the significant challenges faced by s4c in providing a wide range of good - quality programmes for both linear tv and online consumption , and protects the viability of the welsh medium sector ? we are of course anxious to protect s4c. as it is a public service broadcaster , many of these provisions apply to s4c , which we strongly support . i am grateful to my right hon . and learned friend for giving way ; she is being very generous with her time . in recognising the importance of public service broadcasting to outstanding broadcasting uk - wide but particularly in wales , we should also recognise that this is not just about welsh language programmes ; it is also about english language programmes produced in wales . is my right and learned hon . friend not saying — entirely correctly — that the bill is not about protecting public service broadcasters , but about allowing them to compete on a level playing field in doing what they do best ? absolutely . my right hon . friend makes an excellent point , because this bill is all about protecting our public service broadcasters , whether that is the bbc , itv , channel 4 or s4c , and i am proud to be bringing it forward . on the point about public service broadcasting , does my right hon . and learned friend recognise the growing importance of local television and how the bill could be improved by making sure that local television coverage is dealt with as a public service broadcaster ? it is getting as important as local radio stations such as swindon 105.5 in my constituency — say that again ! swindon 105.5 — i recommend you all listen to it , and bbc wiltshire , of course . it is important that we recognise local television as a public service broadcaster , and an amendment could be made to the bill in that regard . i am always happy to discuss matters with my right hon . and learned friend . this provision will help to protect radio more broadly through the smart speaker provision and there are other measures on protecting . the government understand the issue of online local news , which is very important , and ofcom has concluded proposals in relation to its role , but there are always matters we can look at further . what is contained in this bill to address the concern that , in the digital age , the bbc licence fee is simply unsustainable ? my hon . friend will know that this is a matter that the government are considering — that is , the question of the licence fee . we have already started looking at the issue that faces the bbc in a changing media landscape . people consume their media in a different way . last year , 400,000 people did not renew their licence . this is something we are looking at , but it is not a question for this bill . as the secretary of state knows , channel 4 is based in leeds and i thank her for her decision that it should be retained as a public service broadcaster in the public sector . the media bill is an opportunity to legislate for new public service broadcasting purposes for media literacy and workforce diversity . they are not currently in the bill , but is the secretary of state considering those two issues in relation to the bill ? as the hon . member will know , we are bringing forward the matters in this bill , but he is right to state the importance of channel 4 . we have brought forward measures to ensure that it retains its ability to be sustainable while also protecting independent producers . i was talking earlier about how it was important to engage to get this bill right . we have engaged heavily and are very grateful to the wide number of people who have helped to ensure that the bill has the appropriate scrutiny and has landed in the right place . i would like to put on record my thanks to the culture , media and sport committee under the chairmanship of my hon . friend but it is not just the select committee that has called for this bill . the welsh affairs committee , led by my right hon . friend it is not just films that are central to our creative industries and our national life . we are in a golden age for the silver screen in the uk , and public service broadcasters are the main reason why . whether it is reality tv shows such as “ the great british bake - off ” and “ i ’m a celebrity … get me out of here ! ” , or dramas such as “ time ” , “ broadchurch ” and “ the night manager ” , our public service broadcasters have proven that they can continue to go toe to toe with the streaming giants , but it is clear that this bill is needed to enable our world - leading broadcasters to compete in an ever - more online world . measures in the bill will introduce simpler , more up - to - date rules on what our public service broadcasters have to broadcast and how they reach viewers , making sure that the high - quality public service content for our audiences remains easy to find as viewer habits evolve . for a renowned public service broadcaster such as channel 4 , this bill will help to support its long - term sustainability . this includes removing its publisher broadcaster restriction , which will free up channel 4 to make more of its own content if it wants to , and open new options for diversifying its revenue away from advertising . alongside this , we are bringing forward measures to safeguard channel 4 ’s significant role in driving investment into the production sector . as many members will recall , i set out the core aspects of this package , which the government have designed in consultation with channel 4 and the independent production sector , in a written statement to this house on i heard the right hon . and learned lady ’s previous answer and i am sure that it came from a good place , but just to be absolutely sure — what we are looking for in scotland are provisions similar to those for s4c , and if they could be bolted on as things progress , that would be gratefully welcomed . one final point i would make is that gaelic broadcasting has enjoyed tremendous cross - party support in scotland , pre - devolution and post - devolution , and i think she should bear that in mind . it is probably the same in wales with s4c , so hopefully we will get the same provisions as s4c. i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for raising that issue . he will be aware that alba is not in the same position as s4c because it is a programmer rather than a channel . in that way , it has a relationship with the bbc , and that is how its funding arrangement is determined . rose — i am going to make some progress . i was talking about channel 4 , but it is not just channel 4 that is going to benefit from this bill . the bill includes measures specific to s4c , the welsh language broadcaster . we worked closely with s4c on the provisions in the bill , which will enable s4c to broaden its reach and offer its content on new platforms in the uk and beyond . the bill also updates s4c ’s public service remit to include digital and online services , and implements in statute other recommendations made in the independent williams review in 2018 . these provisions are a crucial part of the government ’s support for regional and minority language broadcasting . we know how important this kind of broadcasting is , giving many people content in a language familiar to them and providing a cultural outlet for communities across the uk . it was no surprise that , in its recent report on broadcasting in wales , the welsh affairs committee called on the government to introduce a media bill to parliament as early as possible in the next session , and i am glad that we have been able to deliver on that commitment . it is clear that online demand streaming services are now an important part of the broadcasting landscape . from netflix to iplayer , they provide huge value to uk audiences and in many cases make significant and growing contributions to the uk economy . while uk audiences enjoy having instant access to the programmes they love , it is also essential that when they watch them on their smart tvs , they enjoy similar protections to live tv . as a member of the welsh affairs committee , i would also welcome assurances that our welsh media broadcasting , s4c , is safeguarded under the media bill , but more specifically , can the secretary of state confirm that the listed events regime will accurately reflect the importance placed by supporters on key competitions including the six nations rugby to ensure their status on terrestrial tv ? the hon . member will know that sport is devolved in scotland , and if the welsh government want to make any recommendations to us in relation to listed events , of course we would be very happy to listen to them . rose — i will make a little progress . the bill will provide greater protections for children and vulnerable audiences through a proportionate new on - demand video code , to be drafted and enforced by ofcom , bringing streaming services in line with the protections that already exist for the audiences of public service broadcasters . the bill will also require greater provision of subtitles , audio description and sign language . this will lead to a much improved service for millions of people living with a hearing loss or visual impairment when they watch or listen to television programmes on demand . i draw the house ’s attention to an expected future interest on this point that i articulated in westminster hall . i thank my right hon . and learned friend for the work she has done to ensure that accessibility is accommodated in this bill , and particularly for responding to the previous work she did with me and others on subtitling and other accessibility points . i was pleased to meet my right hon . friend to discuss these important points , and i am very proud that this bill will ensure greater access so that those with impairments can enjoy the things that those of us without impairments already enjoy . the secretary of state mentioned the scottish affairs committee , of which i am a member . she will know that , in our report on public broadcasting , we recommended that the government provide urgent assurances on maintaining freeview beyond 2034 . that chimes very much with her speech to the royal television society , in which she said : “ we want terrestrial television to remain accessible for the foreseeable future . ” does she anticipate an opportunity in this bill to ensure we have that guarantee beyond 2034 ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for raising this important point , because we want to ensure that everybody has access to television . that is why i made those comments in my speech . we are looking at this matter . there are a number of ongoing reviews to make sure we have evidence bases . i am happy to stay engaged with him on that subject . from wimbledon to the fifa world cup final , live sports are among the most important fixtures on our television schedules every week . to protect british viewers ’ access to major sporting events , the bill will modernise the listed events regime . in line with the culture , media and sport committee ’s recommendation , we have acted to close the streaming loophole . millions of us tune into the radio every single day to spend time with our favourite presenters or our favourite music . whether it is cambridge 105 radio or lbc , we rely on local radio to keep us entertained and informed . few know more about this issue than my hon . friend the member for warrington south , and i thank him for his tireless work to champion this vital sector . but as modern technology continues to transform how , when and where people tune in , we must ensure that stations across the uk have the right support in place so that they can reach their listeners . i am grateful for the secretary of state ’s kind words . one of the issues we have discussed and debated in this chamber over the last 12 months is the bbc ’s decision to reduce local news on many of its local radio stations . i am very supportive of this bill and welcome the steps to cut red tape for local commercial radio , but can she assure me and this house that there are sufficient provisions to ensure that local news continues on local multiplexes ? i was pleased to visit my hon . friend ’s constituency and to take part in a session on his local radio station . as he knows , the bbc is operationally and editorially independent but , of course , local news is important . we have measures in this bill to protect local news . because listeners increasingly listen to radio using smart speakers , the bill will require that major smart speakers ensure that the uk radio stations that listeners love remain available on request . the bill will also remove a number of outdated and burdensome regulations that are holding back the commercial radio sector , while strengthening protections for local news and information . finally , one of my central priorities as secretary of state is to protect media freedom so that our world - leading media can continue to thrive . the bill has media freedom at its core . one of its most significant measures is the removal of a long - standing threat to that freedom by repealing section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 . section 40 and the possibility of publishers having to pay the legal costs of the people who sue them , even if they win , has hung over our media like a sword of damocles . the bill removes the sword for good . the labour party , of course , is no friend of the free press . the shadow secretary of state has , in the past , called for boycotts of some of this country ’s most well - respected papers . the labour party has accused the government of muddying the waters of this crucial legislation by including the repeal of section 40 , but for us the water is clear . the position is clear : we will protect our free press . at justice questions earlier today , the government were again lauding anti - slapp legislation that protects small publishers and investigative journalists from oppressive conduct by wealthy individuals and organisations . that is exactly what section 40 does , and the minister has completely mischaracterised it . is it not inconsistency , amounting to hypocrisy , to repeal that provision ? the hon . gentleman is very knowledgeable on this point , and i am always grateful for his interventions . i am proud that , together with the minister of state , my right hon . friend i am sure that today we will hear significant contributions on this important bill , and i look forward to the debate . we should be under no illusions about the urgent need to press ahead with reforms . success today is never a guarantee of success tomorrow , and it is our job , as a government and as a house , to enact reforms that keep our broadcasters at the top of their game in the years ahead . that is what the bill will do : levelling the playing field , removing threats to the media ’s sustainability , and opening up opportunities for them to maximise their potential and unlock growth . i commend this bill to the house . as the secretary of state knows , i welcome the introduction of this important and long - overdue bill . i start by making her an offer : i will work with her on a cross - party basis to get the bill into law as quickly as possible , subject to the proper scrutiny that would be expected from his majesty ’s opposition . britain ’s public service broadcasters must be fully equipped with the tools they need to thrive in this intensified era of internet and on - demand television . that is why labour has been calling on the government for some time to bring forward many of the measures in the bill . and it is not just labour ; ofcom , select committees of both houses , the public service broadcasters , consumers and industry leaders across the sector all back the bill and want to see it passed into law , and some have done so for many years . further to the point i made to the secretary of state , and further to the shadow minister ’s excellent point about working co - operatively across the house , would she support a straightforward amendment to protect gaelic language broadcasting ? i hope the government will do so too . i can not say whether i would support an amendment until i have seen it , but despite a specific mention of “ gaelic - language content ” in the briefing note on the king ’s speech , there seems to be no mention of protecting gaelic language broadcasting in the bill , which gives me cause for concern . i am sure that the secretary of state understands how frustrating the delay has been to everyone involved and how , unfortunately , it seems to our public service broadcasters , the creative industries and all the talented people who work in them that the government do not care about them . much of the delay was down to the pointless war on channel 4 : were the government going to sell it off and did they think it was publicly funded ? nadine dorries , their 10th culture secretary in 13 years , certainly seemed to think so , which slowed down the bill . not content with chipping away for more than a decade at our remarkably resilient british creative industries , they attempted to take their tory wrecking ball straight to one of our finest institutions , costing channel 4 and other psbs time that they could have used to get on the stronger footing with their international competitors that the secretary of state has described today . if only the bill had come sooner . selling off channel 4 was never going to work . it was wrong for viewers and it has only done damage to our creative industries . the government should not have been contemplating it in the first place . with all that time wasted , looking inwards and wrangling with themselves , they held our public service broadcasters back . the resulting delay to the bill and all the consequences of that have to sit squarely with the government . never again must our psbs be treated with such disdain . it may seem like a non sequitur , but the culture , media and sport committee undertook incredibly thoughtful pre - legislative scrutiny . i am sure the secretary of state will agree that the committee ’s work added considerably to the quality of the legislation across the piece . psbs are important to the wider creative economy because they stimulate growth , create quality jobs and nurture british talent across all our nations and regions , so i welcome the measures in the bill to boost that success further , particularly those ensuring that psbs are always carried and given prominence on smart tvs , set - top boxes and streaming sticks . there is still debate about whether “ appropriate ” prominence , as it is described in the bill , goes far enough . would “ significant prominence ” avoid confusion ? as we set the framework and as the bill moves to committee , we have to explore what being clear about the mandate to ofcom actually means . for many people , the most important part of the bill is the recognition that psbs bring us joy and their unique universality brings tens of millions of us together , whether to cheer on the lionesses , watch elton at glastonbury or mourn the late queen . at a time where loneliness is at an all - time peak , public service content keeps us connected . it is a string threaded through homes in every city , town and village in this country . i welcome the important modernisations to the listed events regime in the bill — there is a lot to welcome in the bill — including closing the streamer loophole , so that tv - like services that provide live content via the internet , such as the world cup and wimbledon , will be brought within scope in the listed events legislation . however , unfortunately the government have not taken on the culture , media and sport committee ’s recommendation to include digital on - demand rights in the regime , so on - demand highlights and online clips can be kept behind paywalls . i know the government are conducting a review on digital rights , but the deadline for responses to their consultation was last year . i urge the secretary of state to look down the back of the culture , media and sport sofa — i am very fond of sofa metaphors , i am afraid , so hon . members may hear more about sofas later — pull that review out and tell us what is in it ? if the results of the consultation are not ready in time to be included in the bill , will the government include an enabling provision to allow digital rights to be added later ? some of the points raised , including those about digital rights , are made by colin browne of the voice of the listener and viewer . i recommend that the secretary of state and the shadow secretary of state meet him to understand what other points he is concerned about , so they can be addressed during the passage of the bill ? the father of the house is quite right to draw attention to the voice of the listener and viewer — i believe that organisation is on my call list , so i will chase that up following his kind and sensible suggestion . another broad area that i ask the secretary of state to look at again is children and young people ’s television , which has been one of public service broadcasting ’s biggest contributions to the life of our country . i am sure we can all name our favourite programmes , which might reveal the age of hon . members . for me , they are “ jackanory ” , “ grange hill ” and “ the magic roundabout ” , but for others they might be “ byker grove ” and “ the story of tracy beaker ” , tackling issues rarely seen elsewhere in the media . colleagues are welcome to mention their own favourite tv programmes . “ the wombles ” . interesting . the hon . gentleman obviously appreciates the importance of tidying up . sadly , i fear that the importance of children ’s tv has been lost in the bill . there has been a dramatic shift in the viewing habits of young people , particularly children over the age of 7 , as increasingly parents no longer control viewing . coupled with the long - term reduction in commissioning of original uk content for children , i am concerned that the bill does not go far enough . the government must ensure that the next generation does not miss out on the high - quality , culturally relevant storytelling , such as “ the wombles ” , for which our generations are so thankful to our public service broadcasters . i think i will develop a wombles theme now . these programmes have a powerful influence on a child ’s development . they provide role models — i am sure children ’s tv also makes a significant contribution to the economy and provides quality jobs . it is a key part of our soft power too , promoting tolerance , logic and fair play to children all over the world . the government must consider the wider consequences for public service broadcasters if children are not consuming as much content as they used to . it is unhelpful for the long - term interests of our public service broadcasters if a generation has little experience of their content . will the secretary of state think carefully about how she can work with public service broadcasters to get more quality uk - made children ’s content and , crucially , make sure it is as accessible as possible to them ? the bill is designed to allow current public service broadcasters to fulfil their obligations by taking into account their online delivery platforms , but children also spend a massive proportion of their time on disney+ or on video - sharing platforms such as youtube . i urge the secretary of state to speak with those platforms about how they can provide more quality public service content produced here in the uk . there seems to be an excessive amount of advertising on commercial programmes aimed at young children , to the extent that it sometimes seems almost subliminal within the programme . does my hon . friend think that area needs to be looked at , because those programmes are using children as a commercial pressure on their parents or guardians ? the right hon . gentleman will be aware of work done by the children ’s media foundation and i am pleased to note his point . a great concern of mine is that all children ’s television and broadcasting ought to be of the highest possible quality . in our country we have that tradition of making great children ’s tv . i am also concerned about the talent pipeline that psbs rely on . for the past 13 years , successive tory governments have failed to understand the importance of creative education for economic growth and jobs . we get announcements with no follow - up , which means they have not taken the issue at all seriously . government adverts patronised creatives , suggesting that ballerinas should retrain in cyber . complementing the aims of the bill , labour will back the next generation of creative talent that we know our psbs need if they are to fulfil the promise offered by the bill . we will equip the workforce with the skills , knowledge and understanding needed to sustain psbs and the wider creative industries , which are so necessary to fulfil the pipeline . there will be a broad and balanced education for every child , who will have access to high - quality arts , culture and creativity under a future labour government . i recognise the unique and vital role of the independent sector , as set out in the bill . as mp for bristol west , the home of bbc wildlife , some channel 4 studios and many creative industries that supply and work for them , i know how important psbs are , or can be , for driving inward investment into communities across our country . i have seen for myself in my patch how that can stimulate the supply chain and the resilience of the local economy , but i want more for this industry across the country from this government . finally , i welcome the measures in the bill to give s4c , the welsh language broadcaster , more flexibility in the modern world , and i welcome the comments that my hon . friends have made about that . i am extremely grateful to the hon . member for giving way and congratulate her on her appointment . the point that i would like to make to the secretary of state is that , although there is a broad welcome in wales for the reforms to s4c , it is a channel that seems at the moment to be at a crisis point ; perhaps that is going too far — it seems to be in an element of turmoil . i would be very grateful if the secretary of state would look at what is going on at s4c , starting with the journalism of martin shipton on nation . cymru , because there are a few issues that need to be addressed . i thank the hon . member for that intervention , although i think it was probably addressed to the secretary of state . i agree with him on the importance of s4c , as i am sure we all do . i want s4c to have more flexibility in the modern world , but i did note , as has been raised by other colleagues , that there is no specific mention of protecting gaelic broadcasting in the future . that is despite an explicit mention of it in the king ’s speech , so i would be grateful if the secretary of state could clarify what has changed by the next stage of the bill . i thank the secretary of state for bringing forward the measures in the bill and urge her to listen to the comments that i have raised today , and those that my colleagues and others across the house will raise , because there is a great deal of cross - party consensus . we all want the bill to be as good as it possibly can be . i reiterate my offer to work with her to get the bill through parliament in the best shape possible and to do so as smoothly as possible . labour will back this bill to back our public service broadcasters . i echo the sentiment of others . it is always a pleasure to follow this bill is so important and timely for two reasons . the first is the economic importance of the creative sector ; the creative industries are one of the chancellor ’s five important growth sectors — and rightly so , as they contribute something like £ 108 billion to the economy and support something like 2 million jobs . they are an extremely important part of the british economy and also help to spread british soft power around the world . those institutions that provide great creative content are some of the things that people around the world most admire about this country . when i was last in the united states , before the pandemic , i was astounded by how many people asked me if i had heard of “ the crown ” or “ downton abbey ” . if that was not an example of the soft power that our creative industries give this country , then i know of no better . the hon . gentleman is of course quite right , with the slight caveat that of course “ the crown ” is made by netflix — one of the global disruptors that produce great work that we watch , but also give rise to the necessity to protect our own british public service broadcasters . arguably even more important than the economic importance of our public service broadcasters is their cultural importance ; in a global world — where , indeed , people can take british stories but produce them in a global context — we need a british voice or a collection of voices . at a time when our society is riven with divisions , we need activities and means of expression that remind us all of what we share , so the media , which both create and carry those illustrations of our shared experiences , are more important than ever . the protections in the bill are important not just for our economy , but for the flourishing of our culture , and i can think of few more important things that a government can address . my right hon . friend makes an incredibly important point about british soft power and projecting british culture on the world stage . does he agree that , within that , there is also huge scope for projecting the variety of what modern britain looks like ? does he agree that , whether it is through programmes on disney+ like “ welcome to wrexham ” or through the welsh public service broadcasters , projecting welsh , scottish and northern irish identities as part of that overall industry is an incredibly important thing in the 21st century ? partly as a fellow welsh man , i completely agree with my right hon . friend that it is about the subtlety of british culture . there is one recognisable british culture , but within that there are many streams of different cultures , and preserving each is extremely important — not just by itself but also to preserve the whole british culture . precisely because we have not just one public service broadcaster — it is not just the bbc , but people from itv , channel 4 , s4c and channel 5 doing great work — we get the ability to project diversity of voices within the wider british voice . that is extremely important . i am grateful to the right hon . member for giving way . i had hoped that there would be consensus right across the house on epistle he is giving on the importance of the gaelic language , and that an amendment to make sure that the gaelic language is protected should be supported across the house . if i may say so , there is a gaelic tv station , bbc alba radio nan gàidheal — in contrast to what was perhaps said from the dispatch box . it is important that we have that parity of esteem and that we can consider the funding that is necessary to allow the station to flourish . i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman for making that point . as that matter is not in the bill , i have not considered it very carefully . if i may say so , i thought that it was an expression of wisdom on the part of the shadow secretary of state when she made the point that she could not commit to supporting an amendment that she had not seen . i think that is a good rule for everyone . i wish to concentrate briefly on five areas covered by the bill , the first of which is indeed channel 4 . it is what is not here that i celebrate as much as what is , because the secretary of state took an early and wise decision not to proceed with a wholesale privatisation of channel 4 . i always thought that that policy was based on two pillars that were mutually incompatible ; there was an argument that channel 4 had no commercial future and was not viable , and a separate argument that it could be sold off and raise a huge sum of money for the treasury . it seemed to me that we could make a plausible argument for either of those propositions , but it was really impossible to make a plausible argument for both those propositions at the same time , and that seemed to be what the government were seeking to do for a time . i wholeheartedly congratulate the secretary of state on moving on from that policy and finding new ways to make channel 4 viable in the long term , because that is extremely important . the way that the government have chosen to do that is to remove the publisher - broadcaster restriction to allow channel 4 to start making some of its own content . i merely observe at this stage that i hope that that will be done very cautiously , because among the virtues of channel 4 is not just what it broadcasts , but the fact that it has promoted the growth of an enormous sector of production companies — some very small and some that have grown to be very large — and it is that ecosystem that has allowed much the successful creativity in recent decades , for more than 40 years . i should declare an interest , because i was working for “ channel 4 news ” the day the station started . i was there from day one . i suspect that , particularly given that the early reception of “ channel 4 news ” was — how shall i put it?—not wholly positive , if somebody had told us then that the programme would still be on air at the same time every night as it was in 1982 when the station started , we would all have dropped down dead with shock . nevertheless , it is still there and it is still controversial , and many other excellent things have been produced by the channel . that has allowed other production companies to flourish , so i hope that , as channel 4 moves cautiously towards producing some of its own programmes , it recognises , and the regulator and the government recognise , that preserving that ecosystem of independent companies is hugely important . channel 4 says that its move into in - house tv production will be gradual and will build on the existing diversity in the market ; i very much hope that it observes that and that there is not too much conflict between proceeding cautiously with that and maintaining the channel ’s overall viability . the second detail in the bill that i would like to deal with is preserving the prominence of public broadcasters on the new platforms that people use to watch tv . i welcome the measures in the bill , but with some caveats . it is obviously important to ensure that uk users can easily find the public service content they value ; despite the increasingly diverse global marketplace that we have discussed , about seven in 10 uk adults want uk life and culture represented on screen , and that is the core purpose of the public service broadcasters . if i may pick up on the many gratifying favourable references to the cms committee , on which i serve under the enlightened chairmanship of my hon . friend another detailed point i would make is that the bill creates a level playing field in the must - carry / must - offer section for commercial psbs in their negotiations with the programmers about how they will be carried , but not for the bbc . an amendment to that part of the bill covering the must - carry obligations , setting out that a regulated platform should act consistently with the equivalent bbc charter and framework agreement provisions , would address that small point . the next point i will concentrate on is listed events , and here i echo some of the remarks made earlier in the debate : it is very welcome that the loophole about streaming services has been closed . that will be a significant step forward in the way people watch big sporting events in particular , but again i commend to ministers a recommendation of the select committee that the government should go further and include digital on - demand rights as well , because that is how many people will watch big sporting events — something that brings the country together — in future . with the tokyo olympics in 2021 , which were obviously in a different time zone , some digital on - demand clips and highlights reached 10 times more people than the live tv coverage where an event had seen some british success overnight in this country . if we look ahead to future great sporting events , the men ’s football world cup is in the usa , mexico and canada , and the 2028 and 2032 olympics are in the usa and australia respectively . those are all inconvenient time zones for most british viewers , so extending the regime to on - demand rights would make a lot of difference to a lot of viewers . i echo the point made by my right hon . and learned friend my final point is about radio . i am a lifelong fan of radio , and i am impressed and surprised by how the medium is flourishing in this area of infinite choice , particularly when it comes to music listening . for years , people have thought that the existence of services such as spotify would kill off radio , but the opposite seems to be happening : there is more radio listening than ever . that is a tribute to all those in the radio sector , both bbc and commercial services , who have done an incredible job of preserving new generations of listeners . as another word of congratulation to ministers , i am delighted that , after some doubt , part 6 on the radio sector has been included in the bill , because there are some very important protections that are needed . as online listening grows , radio stations are becoming increasingly reliant on global technology platforms that produce smart speakers to reach their listeners . it is important , at this stage in the development of radio , that we stop platforms ’ potential abuse of their market position by charging for access to uk radio services or inserting their own adverts in commercial radio services , so those protections are very welcome . on that point about the growth of the radio sector , does my right hon . friend agree that one of the real success stories of recent years is the emergence of a new generation of digital community stations to plug the gap of the local commercial stations that have become part of national groups and lost some of their local rootedness ? does he further agree that ofcom should look at releasing more fm licences so that those new digital community stations can grow , especially in areas such as mine in west wales , where take - up of digital radio is perhaps lower than elsewhere ? i do , because in an era when the biggest media have become completely global , what we used to call hyper - localism is important in all media . radio ashford in my constituency does what it says on the tin — it is very local . it is strictly about the town and it competes with the bbc ’s offering on radio kent , which is broader and , like all bbc local radio , for a large part of the day is regional rather than even county - based . the capacity to have properly local services is very important . if i may suggest a way in which those welcome protections could be strengthened even further , ministers should consider expanding them to include online - only radio content such as podcasts and catch - up radio content , and indeed the systems in vehicles — that is where a significant proportion of radio listening takes place — which are not protected in the bill as it stands . it is important in that context that we give consideration to the community radio stations that broadcast on fm — i have a number in my constituency , including skye fm , two lochs radio , nevis radio — which are very often hand to mouth . it is important that government agencies conducting advertising through local radio stations remember the importance of those community stations and their high level of reach . they need to be given their fair share in that regard . i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman , who makes a powerful point . to conclude , the bill is welcome . many of the individual measures are welcome and necessary . some could and should be improved , and i am sure that they will be as the bill is scrutinised in its various stages . overall , i am delighted that the bill is now before the house , and i wish it , and the ministers carrying it through , well . i call the snp spokesperson . i appreciate having the opportunity to lead for the snp on second reading . my hon . friend although the bill is welcome and takes a number of positive steps forward , i am concerned about how over - complicated some of it is . the bill amends the communications act 2003 , the broadcasting act 1996 and the broadcasting act 1990 . apart from amendments to corporation acts and tax acts , i have not seen anything quite this complicated . if i were a broadcaster or worked in this area , i would find it difficult to find all the information i needed even to comply with the legislation because of its complicated nature . the media bill mostly amends those three pieces of legislation , as well as a few others in smaller technical ways — smaller technical amendments are absolutely standard — but it has been done in a complicated way that will make it difficult to find some of the definitions . i was looking , for example , for the definition of “ programme ” . i was directed to the communications act 2003 , which directed me to the broadcasting act 1990 , which then told me what the definition was . i have yet to find out the definition of “ person ” . perhaps the minister could furnish me with information on where i could find that definition in those three pieces of legislation . i did , however , find out that when it comes to choosing programmes and organising programming , an algorithm can be counted as a “ person ” if someone is assisted by an algorithm . i would find it very helpful if the minister pointed me in the direction of the definition of “ person ” , which is used a significant number of times in the bill when it talks about a person who is in charge of programming . does the word “ person ” also relate to an entity or a group of people if they are in charge of programming ? it would be helpful to have more information on that . i am slightly concerned about other definitions and uses of words . the requirement for ofcom to work out that there is a sufficiency of something without there being any clarity on what “ sufficiency ” means is slightly concerning , because something that i see as sufficient may not be seen as sufficient by somebody else . if there were more information on what “ sufficient ” meant , there would be more clarity on the changes to channel 4 as a proportion of expenditure , for example , as opposed to a proportion of programming . “ sufficiency ” is not sufficiently defined in the bill . the shadow secretary of state mentioned the word “ appropriate ” in respect of the availability of public sector broadcasters through internet services , and raised concerns about whether it should be re - termed as “ significant ” . that would probably give those broadcasters the level of prominence that we expect and want them to have , so that people can access their services in the way that they want and expect . i agree that there could be a different way of doing that . i will come to a number of different issues , but let me touch on the requirement on the prominence of services . that is important , and i am glad that the government have chosen to tackle the prominence of services . the order in which public service broadcasters appear — particularly for those who use amazon fire sticks , for example — is important . as those broadcasters have responsibilities that other broadcasters do not , it is important that they are given a level of primacy . however , i am concerned that the app store and the google play store are not included in the measures , given the way in which such organisations — particularly the app store — have behaved . they have said , “ we can carry things such as the bbc iplayer or the stv player only if you give us a significant slice of your revenue . ” that is not acceptable . if people look up the bbc iplayer on the app store , it should be the top result , rather than being placed further down because apple has had an argument with the bbc about it . it is inappropriate for apple to charge the bbc significant amounts of money for a level of prominence that the bbc should have by right as a public service broadcaster . that is important not just in relation to the software in the fire stick , for example — or however we choose to view our video - on - demand services — but in the prominence that public service broadcaster apps , such as channel 4 on demand and bbc iplayer , are given . the same applies to bbc sounds in radio access . those broadcasters should not be charged significant amounts for that prominence . while i am on radio , i appreciate what has been said about ensuring that alexa and siri provide the correct radio station . i would really like alexa or siri to play taylor swift when i ask for her , rather than rage against the machine . it is not that they are trying to provide me with something else ; it is that they do not understand my scottish accent . improving the listening ability of those services so that they can play the song that i want would be incredibly helpful . i like the provisions on advertising . in some cases , it is not alexa or siri making decisions on advertising ; it is tunein radio — or whichever programme alexa or siri is playing through — that is making those decisions . as long as that provision applies to how we hear advertising , rather than who deals with the background stuff , i am happy enough with the measures . i agree with i appreciate the level of children ’s content we have had , particularly on the bbc , having watched cbeebies with my children . when i was younger , i went to a fancy dress party dressed as a tweenie . i can not remember whether i was bella , milo , fizz or jake , but i can tell the house that i did not have to look up those names , because i remembered them . they are ingrained in my soul , having watched the show with my little sisters . they are significantly younger than me , which is why i mention such a recent television programme . ofcom has had to scale up massively to service the provisions of the online safety act 2023 . i am appreciative of that , and i have a lot of time for the growth in capacity and the number of excellent people it has brought in to do the work . can the minister give us a level of reassurance that , for the policing of this area , the writing of the regulations and guidance that this bill will require and the different interactions that ofcom will be having , in particular with video - on - demand services , it will have the number of individuals and capacity and resource to be able to undertake such additional layers of work ? i am aware that ofcom is doing significant portions of work around broadcasting already , but i do not want it to have to stretch itself when it is already having to grow at pace . i am concerned that there are not even the number of qualified individuals to take on that work , given how specialised and important it is . can the minister reassure me that he is having conversations at least with ofcom about its capacity when this legislation comes in ? a number of my colleagues have mentioned the gaelic language and the issues around it . of course , those could all be solved by devolving broadcasting to the scottish government , but in lieu of that , i will highlight some of the disparities . the secretary of state was perhaps getting a little confused between bbc alba and mg alba , which are two different organisations . [ interruption . ] alba — my pronunciation is nearly there . i am an east - coaster . the two organisations are different and operate differently . we appreciate the support being given to s4c , which is a good thing , but we have a disparity , as £ 89 million of licence fee is going to s4c , whereas only £ 10 million is going to the gaelic language . there is a requirement for a quota of at least 10 hours a week of welsh language programming , but no requirement for a similar quota for gaelic programming . i am concerned by that . the hon . member is making a very good point about the gaelic language . i absolutely hate to say this in this place , but my constituency has a few native gaelic speakers — there are so few of them . i pray that in a few years ’ time another generation will have the language . gaelic is in a vulnerable situation , which reinforces her point . i very much appreciate the hon . member ’s point . i went to visit a gaelic nursery in aberdeen a couple of years ago . staff there were concerned about the reduction in gaelic programming for children , because outside the nursery the children were not necessarily getting the exposure to gaelic that they might have had if they had lived in skye or the western isles . they were concerned that , just because they had chosen not to live in those communities , the language embedded in those children and their ability to access tv programmes in their native first language was significantly reduced . i am concerned by the disparity . i hope the minister appreciates that we are coming from a good place in trying to ensure the protection of gaelic , some level of parity and that people across scotland can access it . i will highlight specifically what the bill states . it states that there has to be “ a sufficient quantity of audiovisual content that is in , or mainly in , a recognised regional or minority language ” . later , the bill states that “ ‘ recognised regional or minority language ’ means welsh , the gaelic language as spoken in scotland , irish , scots , ulster scots or cornish . ” the bill does not define what “ a sufficient quantity ” is . it does not say whether it will be measured on the basis of the percentage of people who speak that language in each of the countries . that wording is concerning , and given that there is a quota for welsh programming , it is disappointing that there is not a similarly recognised quota for any of the other languages . my hon . friend is making some strong points , and all of us on the snp benches support full funding for s4c , but it is specifically worth saying that there is no index - linking of the funding available for mg alba . in many respects , the situation that gaelic broadcasting is now facing is even worse than people might consider , because in real terms the funding available for mg alba will , by 2027 , be 50 % of what it was in 2008 . we are facing an existential threat to the survival of gaelic broadcasting . we can think about the breadth and depth of the programming . i have programme - making in skye , including from chris young of young films , who is known for “ the inbetweeners ” . he , for example , produced the excellent “ bannan ” . we need to fund such broadcasting appropriately . i agree . we do not regret or feel angry at the welsh language programming that is provided and the support for it . as my right hon . friend said , we are looking for parity , and the index - linking of funding is important . we also need to recognise that the scottish government are already providing significant funding for the gaelic language and to mg alba , but there is no parity in terms of the licence fee . i have a few other things i wish to say . sadly , the bill finally says goodbye to teletext ; it is the end of teletext as we know it . it has not been in use since 2009 , but the bill finally removes it from legislation . i also wish to talk about football games and how broadcasting and listing works . listing is the particular concern . the secretary of state said that the listing system is being revamped — i am not sure exactly what word she used but that was the direction she intended . however , the listing system itself — the way in which category a and category b listings are chosen — is not being revamped . no change is being made to that . my hon . friend “ ’ national interest ’ includes interest within england , scotland , wales or northern ireland . ” it does not say , “ england , scotland , wales and northern ireland ” ; it says “ or northern ireland ” . given how popular scotland ’s football team is in scotland , its games should be classed of national importance , especially as we have finally made it to the finals of a tournament . that is wonderful and we want to be able to see those games . it is not fair that viewers in scotland have to pay to see their national team play , whereas viewers everywhere else in the uk do not have to pay for the same privilege . this issue is important . i note the point that the shadow secretary of state made about the culture , media and sport committee ’s digital rights enabling provision , and i agree that if enabling provisions could be made on digital rights for sports events , that would be an important move . i have a couple more issues to raise . the first is on - demand services and the inclusion of the 30 - day requirement . unfortunately , the bill does not make it clear whether that means 30 consecutive days . it is important that the word “ consecutive ” be added unless precedent in other legislation suggests that “ 30 days ” means 30 consecutive days . why is news excluded from that provision ? this legislation provides for quite a lot of delegated powers . i have not managed to make my way through all of them , but using the affirmative procedure often strikes the right balance . using the draft affirmative procedure for a significant amount of the delegated powers in this bill is important . i am pleased that we have the bill . i am concerned about the lack of futureproofing in some of it and about the overcomplication , as some of the definitions are difficult to follow and therefore may not achieve what the government intend . the cultural sector is incredibly important to the entirety of the uk . it is incredibly important in scotland , and we certainly will not oppose the media bill as it goes forward . i call the chair of the culture , media and sport committee . i am delighted to speak in this debate , not least because although the government have been committed to a media bill for a long time , it has always been with that well - worn caveat , “ when parliamentary time allows ” . i am really grateful to both the secretary of state and the shadow secretary of state , so much has changed since the last piece of major media legislation was passed 20 years ago , in the days when broadcasters decided when their programmes could be watched , tv was almost entirely analogue and only about 4 % of the country had any form of access to the internet . but not everything has changed . public service broadcasters remain at the heart of the uk ’s media ecosystem , providing content that enriches our culture , our society and our democracy , and radio remains resilient , despite the environment in which it operates changing beyond recognition . it falls to us to pass legislation that both recognises the immense way in which technology and audience behaviour has changed and preserves the future of our valued psbs and radio stations for years to come . i am really pleased to see that the government have accepted the majority of our committee ’s recommendations following our hard work on the bill . the changes make the bill more effective , closing the loophole that allows an unregulated streaming service to buy the rights for a listed sporting event and then stick it behind a pay wall . they make it more workable , improving the drafting of how the must - offer and must - carry carriage deals between psbs and platforms should be negotiated . they make the bill more proportionate , exempting news and sport from the requirement for on - demand content to be available for 30 days if it is to count towards a psb ’s remit . they make it more futureproofed , ensuring that the definition of an internet radio service can be amended to reflect changing audience habits or use of technology , and they make the bill clearer , by ensuring that channel 4 ’s sustainability duty is compatible with its existing statutory obligations . there remain a few areas where the bill will benefit from further discussion as it progresses , and i would like to pick up on a few of those today . the first is the issue of genres , which some members have talked about . ensuring prominence for our public service broadcasters is central to the bill , but it is the obligation on them to provide high - quality and diverse programming that enables us to make the argument for prominence so incontrovertibly . the changes to the public service broadcasting remit are significant . other than news and current affairs , the bill will remove the genres in the communications act 2003 — for example , religious and arts programming , or children ’s programming ; i will not be drawn into the trap of discussing my favourite , because my dad may well be watching the debate — and replace them with an obligation to provide programming that reflects the lives and concerns of the uk ’s different communities and cultural interests and traditions . that simplifies the remit of psbs and the enforcement of it for ofcom , but at what cost ? in our inquiry , the committee found that these changes have received far less attention than other aspects of the bill . funnily enough , it was something that the psbs themselves did not want to linger on in their evidence to us , but that is all the more reason why we need to consider whether these changes are the right ones . it is true that much of what people regard as public service content is now provided by a wide range of providers beyond psbs and sometimes for free — for example , on sky arts — but not all genres are served in that way , and we need to be sure that the bill gets the balance right . with regard to prominence , obligations on our psbs must be fairly balanced with the benefits that they are going to see . the harder it is to find public service broadcasting content , the less likely that content is to be watched , so psbs need prominence on smart tvs and streaming sticks . that can not come soon enough , but those who followed our inquiry will know that there was a debate among stakeholders as to whether we keep the existing descriptor for electronic programming guides that psbs ’ prominence should be “ appropriate ” , or change it to “ significant ” . that sounds like a really technical argument , but in the advanced user interfaces of today , what prominence looks like varies considerably from device to device and from platform to platform , so it is really important . what is considered appropriate prominence is far more open to interpretation than before , which is why we supported changing “ appropriate ” to “ significant ” . that was one of the few recommendations we made that the government did not accept . ultimately , what really matters is ensuring that public service content is always carried and is always easy to find , so that is what we need to work through as the bill progresses . we also need to consider whether the bill ’s “ must carry ” obligations on platforms need aligning with the “ must offer ” obligations in the bbc ’s charter and framework agreement . are we aiming for a level playing field between platforms and all our psbs , or only the commercial ones ? the house needs to explore that question , as well as whether the government should extend the new prominence regime to local tv services . those services are given prominence on electronic programme guides , on either channel 7 or channel 8 , but the bill does not give them prominence on smart tvs . we need to decide whether that is the right direction . there are also places where i would be grateful if our ministers provided more detail . our committee recommended that the new video - on - demand code should apply to all platforms in the same way that the broadcasting code applies to all broadcasters . however , the government intend to apply that code only to platforms with a large uk audience . i recognise the government ’s argument that the legislation must be proportionate : clearly , applying the code to small , niche services such as a football team ’s on - demand service could unfairly and unnecessarily penalise them , with no overall audience protection . however , we need more indication from the government of the types of services they have in mind . the minister will probably say that no decision has been made , but ministers will have already considered this issue as they developed the bill and responded to the select committee ’s report , so i hope he will be able to say a bit more about what services he envisages being in scope . we also need a bit more clarity on a late addition to the bill : the introduction of a new special clause for multi - sport events that was not in the draft bill . that clause would apply to four group a events : the summer olympics and paralympics and the winter olympics and paralympics . currently , ofcom consent is not required when there are genuine partnerships — that is , full and comprehensive rights on both sides of the partnership — but the bill will change that , with each partner only entitled to “ adequate live coverage ” . this morning , the select committee had a session on women ’s sport and met broadcasters , including the bbc ’s director of sport , barbara slater . she raised real concerns about the impact of that clause , especially without any detail of what “ adequate ” means . if we are to avoid psb coverage of those listed events being undermined by the bill , we need clarity . why did ministers add that clause ? what is wrong with the current rules ? we need to make sure that we protect those moments of national importance , and that the bill does not lead to any unintended consequences . turning to radio , there are places where we could look again at what is covered by the legislation . as members have already heard from my right hon . friend ultimately , of course , there is only one question to ask of any piece of media legislation : does it deliver for its audiences ? first , the bill is critical to the sustainability of our psbs . while those broadcasters do not always get everything right , they provide huge value for audiences : they are the broadcasters who entertain us , who teach us , and who show us our national sporting triumphs — and , quite often , our defeats . secondly , the bill is critical if viewers are to be confident that all tv - like content , whether broadcast or on demand , will be subject to the same or similar standards . thirdly , this bill is critical to the future of radio , where stations are increasingly dependent on online platforms for access to listeners . this bill seeks to ensure that radio remains the strong , trusted medium that it is today . yes , there is more discussion to be had on the exact contents of the bill , but it does deliver for audiences , which is why i am so pleased to hear that it has support from across the house and why i want to see it come into law as soon as possible . i want to start by expressing my party ’s broad support for this bill , which is timely . what a change we have seen since 2003 when the communications act was passed : it is a massive change . the new legislation is crucial for public sector broadcasters , and i therefore believe that time is of the essence . however , i am treating this debate as a bit like a tutorial in which we will have an interesting exchange of ideas . on behalf of my party , i will reserve our opinions — in the light of certain reservations that i will express — and we shall be abstaining on the bill tonight . that does not in any way indicate that we do not support the thrust of the bill , and i think that needs to be understood . the first concern i would air is the removal of some regulations about local broadcasting . we have heard from all around the chamber the importance of local broadcasting , including what it means in platforming voices and stories from across the nations and regions , not least the highlands , where i come from . i think this is a good point at which to unreservedly add my support to my colleagues — one across the minch , i am sure the hon . gentleman would agree that there should be some sort of legislative underpinning and support for gaelic broadcasting . indeed , bbc alba has asked for that and pointed that out . yes , the hon . gentleman is absolutely correct . furthermore , as we know , local radio — and , as was expressed by on the issue of quotas , the removal of ofcom ’s responsibility to monitor the delivery of content in education , science and culture may risk content in these areas declining . that would concern me because , as was eloquently expressed by on accessibility , when it comes to linear television , there is a requirement for 90 % of programmes to be provided with subtitles , as we know . it is right that there should be greater access to those things . let me give the house another personal example . on a sunday evening , a cousin of mine who is a little older than me comes and has a meal with my wife and i , and she watches the television . she is a great friend and much loved . she is also pretty deaf , and for some television programmes we can get the subtitles up , but for others we can not . perhaps i am not very intelligent with it , but by gosh we ’ve tried , and it is hugely frustrating that she can not see the words that are being said . the same applies to people with visual impairment — we are talking about signing and other ways of helping . the liberal democrat party will look to require that at least 80 % of on - demand tv content be subtitled , with 10 % audio described and 5 % signed . that is our position at this stage . while i find it tricky to find the subtitles , another issue is also tricky to find . one of the most important aspects of the bill is the call for public service broadcaster prominence , ensuring that the likes of bbc , channel 4 and itv are not only easy to find on any smart tv , but are also given due prominence . this is the existential issue for our public service broadcasters , and the question of how appropriate prominence will be defined is vital . the liberal democrats would like the current call for “ appropriate ” prominence be strengthened to “ significant ” prominence , and i believe we will be tabling amendments to see whether we can achieve that . the hon . member is talking about a range of different issues , which highlight the fact that there are a lot of disparate concerns about the bill . does he share my concern that the draft programme motion does not include taking oral evidence for the bill , and does he understand why the government have done that ? i believe that is a wise point , and we would be wise to heed it . when it comes to channel 4 , i believe i am not alone in having concerns about plans to relax the publisher - broadcaster status , and about the potential risk that that poses to the unique contribution that the channel makes to the diversity and sustainability of the independent production sector across the nations and regions . again , that takes me back to my earlier point about the sheer diversity of the product being part of our soft power , which is important to this country . however , there is a caveat . with the increased independent production quota and channel 4 ’s prediction that any changes will take at least five years to launch , that fundamental change might not lead to any market shock in the short term . but the proof of the pudding is in the eating , and we shall see . finally , let me turn to what is perhaps a core debating point today . section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 requires new outlets to pay the costs — we know what that is all about . the liberal democrats stand firmly against that charge . the 2013 bill followed the leveson inquiry and the phone hacking scandal , and the proposed change will put at risk the balance between free speech and public safeguarding , all the while favouring news publishers . one could say that that is a standard political stance in this debate , and perhaps conservative members would take a different view . however , let us consider one final point , which is important in terms of the notion of british justice . this change would mean that anyone without substantial financial resources or deep pockets that can match the might of the newspapers would find it impossible to pursue legitimate grievances through the legal system . we need to think about that very deeply . what can the small man possibly do against the publishing giants ? that is hugely important and i think there is a warning here . with that i will conclude my remarks . i sincerely hope that my career in this place will not include any more gaffes on live radio , but you can never tell , madam deputy speaker , least of all from a highland member of parliament . a number of hon . members have mentioned how long it has been since the last major piece of media legislation , but it is worth reflecting on that period of change and what it means . when the communications act 2003 was passed more than 20 years ago , amazon was a relatively small online retailer selling music , books and video games , netflix delivered videos and dvds by mail order for people to watch at home , and youtube did not exist . if we had asked someone then what a smart device was , they would probably have guessed that it was a scientific calculator . there were no smart devices , and the iphone was still some years away from existing . the idea that every one of us would carry in our pockets a device allowing us to watch live television whenever we like would not have been envisaged , or people would have thought that to be far off . that is significant not just because technology changes the media landscape but because it has a massive impact on viewing habits . that in many ways is the real challenge faced by the public service broadcasters today . the bill is a hugely welcome step towards addressing some of those needs , but there will continue to be an ongoing challenge . all ofcom data is clear that , with the exception of the pandemic period when everyone watched a lot more television , public service broadcasting is declining . the minutes people spend each day watching public service broadcasting are declining year on year . broadcasters face ongoing pressure not just from that audience decline but from rising costs through inflation for television production , which are running much faster than the consumer prices index . that puts an inevitable squeeze on budgets . public broadcasters that have the luxury of making more of their own programmes while raising money through subscriptions and other things are better placed to deal with that audience change . nevertheless , it is there . the biggest challenge that the bbc faces is not about it not making brilliant programmes , not having fantastic writers or not nurturing brilliant talent ; it is that people are voluntarily declining to pay the licence fee simply because they feel their needs in gathering news or watching fantastic programming can be met elsewhere . the challenge that channel 4 has faced is that , without the ability to invest in programmes from which it can make money , it relies solely on advertiser revenue , and that revenue is under challenge all the time , so it is much harder for it to be sustainable and to plan for the future . i welcome the government ’s introduction of measures in the bill to change channel 4 ’s remit . i understand the concerns raised by companies in the independent production sector , but i think they would recognise that that sector is totally different from when channel 4 launched . at that time , a lot more bbc and itv production was done in - house and there were no other routes to television . channel 4 created an opportunity for independent production companies to launch businesses , make programmes and gain an audience that otherwise would not have existed . now , there are huge opportunities for independent producers . while channel 4 is an important part of that ecosystem , it is by no means the only one , so the best thing we can do for the independent sector is ensure that channel 4 is in as robust health as possible so that it can commission more , because 65 % or 70 % of a bigger tv company is worth a lot more than 100 % of a very small one , or one that is struggling to continue to exist . those are the ongoing challenges that the psbs will face , and the fight for attention will only continue . people now are more distracted not only by video - on - demand services but by video gaming and other forms of audio - visual entertainment . that is the backdrop against which the bill is being introduced . the question of the degree of psb prominence on connected devices — modern televisions that are internet - connected and totally integrated with people ’s on - demand viewing habits — is incredibly important . whether that level of prominence is “ significant ” or “ appropriate ” is an important debate . is it enough simply to have the television schedule there on the device , with that schedule the live schedule ranked in order on the electronic programming guide as we are used to seeing it ? how easy is that to find ? will people be constantly shifting through menus for on - demand services , be those netflix , amazon , sky programming or whatever , before they find the television guide ? we see in ofcom ’s yearly audience analysis data from its media nations report that those under the age of 40 do not really regard television as a live product any more , unless they are watching the news or live sport ; it is an on - demand product . if we asked student audiences what they thought of the tv schedule , they would find the idea of going home , turning on a television , pressing the no . 3 button and watching live what had been preselected for them , in a selected order , completely anathema . younger audiences do not expect television to be a live product . they do not expect to go to the television guide to find what they want . in fact , audience analysis shows that , increasingly , when people turn the television on , the first thing they do is turn to an on - demand service like netflix to browse what is there — that is their primary act , rather than going to a channel . whether it is easy to find the schedule and see what is being shown will be key to the debate on prominence . otherwise , the psbs will continue to find it hard to have a share of voice and be noticed in an environment where people are increasingly distracted by what they want to see . that experience itself is fractured , as a consequence of the way that on - demand services are designed . they are tailored to the user , so everyone will see a different screen when they turn them on . when everyone turns to netflix , they see something different . they even see different tiles advertising the same programmes , tailored based on their past viewing habits . that is great for the consumer ; it makes it much easier to navigate the services and find what they are looking for , but it makes it much harder for them to be challenged and surprised . what is the value and role of original british content , telling unique stories of people on these islands ? how easy will that be to find if people do not know to look for it and have not viewed it before ? those are the sorts of questions that ofcom will have to consider . the bill gives ofcom the power to issue guidance , but it is important that here in this house we are on top of what ofcom analyses and recommends , and that we feel that whatever the final wording of the bill , it ensures that psbs get a fair share of voice . i did not even think about the tv schedule as something that people look at . i never look at a tv schedule . i do not know if my fire stick or my playstation has a tv schedule . on significant prominence , i was picturing the bbc iplayer app being at the top of the apps list . does the hon . gentleman agree that ofcom should look at both those things : how it appears on the screen and where the public service broadcasters are in any live schedule ? the hon . lady makes an important point . it should be easier to find through app stores . although they are not directly in scope of the legislation because they are not broadcast formats in their own right , that question should be asked — is it easy to find ? it should be easy to find on a connected device when it is turned on , and it should be easy to locate the apps . ofcom also has to consider whether the business model that underpins connected devices is fair to public service broadcasters . there is no doubt that the business model for amazon and google is to try to create a connected device space where all the entertainment exists and is tailored to each person . they also want to build the ad tech into that , so that they are the principal beneficiaries of the ad revenue , by monetising the placement of that content as well and diverting it away from broadcasters who have traditionally sold audiences to make money . that is the underlying problem that public service broadcasting faces today . the sale of audiences to generate advertising revenue to invest in programmes — the model that has fuelled independent public broadcasting for 50 years — is not broken , but it does not work in the way it used to ; it is much more diffuse . the revenue challenges that come from that are extremely real . that is why , on channel 4 , although i am pleased to see the government ’s changes to the remit , we need to keep a watching brief to see whether they go far enough . we have not gone as far as channel 4 asked to go in its counter - offer to privatisation , which was the ability to go to the markets to raise money from private investors to create a programming fund that would invest £ 1 billion over two years in new programming . if we simply allow channel 4 to acquire a stake in the making of programmes that it will broadcast , which will make revenue in the future , will that be enough now to meet the challenges that it will face ? given the ongoing pressures this year on declining ad revenue for tv broadcasting , we need to make sure that that will be enough . we should not assume that the measures in the bill , which are welcome , will be the last word on that . there may be more challenges to come . i would like to add two further points . it is right that we try to create more parity between the regulation of on - demand online services and broadcast television . if a viewer turns on their connected tv device , as far as they are concerned netflix is as much television as the bbc , and there should be some parity in the way the platforms are regulated , the obligations they have to their users and the notifications they give about the suitability of the content . that should apply to advertising too . often the debate we have is around advertising that targets children , but children are not watching live television ; they are watching it on demand . the danger at the moment is that we have a highly regulated live broadcast television environment , but an almost completely unregulated online one . we should be far more worried about the ad rules that apply on youtube than those on itv , because that is where the children are . it is vital that the work on the government ’s online advertising review is completed at pace . the project has been worked on for a number of years . there needs to be proper enforceability of the advertising codes that have stood us in good stead in the broadcast world , but do not yet work in the same way online . finally , on media ownership and media freedom , which the secretary of state mentioned in her opening remarks , we should give some consideration — maybe the bill is not the right place — to the ownership of uk news companies and news assets , particularly if they are acquired by organisations based in jurisdictions overseas where maybe the regard for press freedom is not the same as it is in the uk . the bill does not address that concern . if we have an ongoing concern about a vibrant news media landscape , there should be some concern about the companies that own media organisations — where they are based , what their interests are and what interest they have in the way the news is reported here . we do not want to see the press regulated in any way — we want to avoid that and in many ways the measures in the bill are a nod to that as well — but we want certainty about safeguarding media freedom in the future . my hon . friend makes a very interesting point about news media . what does he think about the ownership of public service broadcasters ? should there be legislation in place to consider who is allowed to own a public service broadcaster ? for example , itv could be bought and sold tomorrow on the stock exchange to somebody in a different country who has very different values and views on what content might be put out on itv . should that be in scope as well ? my hon . friend makes a very interesting point . whether it be itv or a newspaper such as the daily telegraph , which is currently up for sale , what is the motivation of someone acquiring them ? we might assume they would not seek to censor what was going on , but would they have a different view on creative content , news , the stories they want to tell and what obligations exist for them ? that is not something we have had to consider before , but in a market where such media assets are attractive to global investors , we should not be unconcerned about the motivations of investors who might buy those companies . mòran taing , madam deputy speaker . it is a pleasure to be called to speak in this debate . there has been much discussion about the impact of the bill on gaelic broadcasting and it is that that i would like to reflect on today . i think it is fair to say that in decades gone by—50 or 60 years ago — there was largely indifference to the gaelic language right across the political divide . that , i am glad to say , has changed . let me state that the gaelic language belongs to absolutely everyone and it is right that we continue to look at the support we can give to the language on that cross - party basis . it is important that we retain that consensus . the reason i mention 50 or 60 years ago is because in the 1970s some fundamental changes took place . in some respects , there was a renaissance for the language . we had the establishment of the gaelic college in skye — we have just celebrated its 50th anniversary — and there was everything that happened in a wider sense in music . there was the arrival , again on the island of skye , of the rock bank runrig , which gave a voice to young people in the language . we think , of course , about what the west highland free press did . my friend in the light of all of that , what we do and in particular what we do in relation to the media bill is important . it is worth reflecting that the government have in the past said some very encouraging things about recognising the importance of the gaelic language . according to a white paper published on “ the government recognises the hugely valuable contribution that mg alba makes to the lives and wellbeing of gaelic speakers across scotland and the uk , including through its unique partnership with the bbc in the provision of bbc alba . such a partnership must ensure high quality , diverse gaelic language content continues to be readily available so that gaelic culture is protected in the years to come . we also recognise that certainty of future funding is important for mg alba being able to deliver for gaelic speakers . ” i endorse those words , and i make an appeal to the minister : that protection of gaelic really must be included in the bill , so that we can then have the necessary discussion about the responsibilities we all have to ensure that there is appropriate support for the language . we have heard a great deal today about remote and rural areas , and i think of the contribution that is made by gaelic broadcasting in such areas . i think of the production facilities in inverness , stornoway and , indeed , portree in my constituency , associated with the gaelic college . we are home to some film production activities — i referred earlier to chris young , who produced “ the inbetweeners”—and i think of some of the gaelic drama that has been produced , such as “ bannan ” . we often hear about programmes in the uk being sold internationally , and this gaelic drama has been sold internationally , although admittedly on a shoestring . i have always been overwhelmed when i have had the opportunity to be on site with the 70 or 80 people producing that masterpiece of gaelic drama . all of that shows what we are capable of doing throughout these islands , and it shows the ability of people to contribute gaelic content , but of course it has to be funded . as i mentioned earlier , we face a cataclysmic challenge because of the real - terms decline in funding for mg alba ever since its foundation in 2008 . we are at a crisis point . i welcome the funding that has gone into s4c , but my goodness , if we could get even a fraction of that funding , what a difference it would make . let us think about not just the social and cultural contribution , but the economic contribution generated by the investment that we have had . mg alba sustains about 340 full - time jobs , half of which are in the highlands and islands , and with its annual funding of £ 13 million , it produces gross value added of more than £ 17 million . we are talking about a return of £ 1.34 for every £ 1 of investment . just think how it would be if we could increase that , and see more of that economic contribution in our remote and rural areas ! i appeal to the good sense of the minister , because i know that he has much good sense . i appeal to him to respond positively when he winds up the debate . let us come together in this chamber and collectively accept our responsibilities for gaelic , as we have for other languages . let us make sure that this station — for mg alba is a station — can flourish , and that bbc radio nan gàidheal can flourish . again , mòran taing , madam deputy speaker . it is a pleasure to contribute to this second reading debate on a bill that comes at a crucial time for our creative industries and broadcasters . several broadcasters are already applying for the 10 - year licences , and we need to have a settled approach to how they can be granted . i should refer the house to my entry in the transparency register , as a former minister , and to the interests that i have declared in the register of members ’ financial interests . my right hon . friend the media bill reflects the changes in technology and in how people consume broadcasting in a variety of ways . a lot more is consumed on the go or on demand , and i regret that there are fewer community moments — water cooler moments , as they used to be called — but broadcasting still plays a vital role in shaping the conversation , through the fun and joy that people have in watching , as well as in exposing some of the interesting challenges we face . in this broader landscape and market , i welcome the global online platforms . they have helped the viewer and the creative industries , but they have also brought a risk for our public service broadcasters , particularly our commercial public service broadcasters , who have responsibilities that those other organisations simply do not have . it is important , if those broadcasters are to be viable and sustainable , that we recognise the context in which those platforms land . there has been at least one call from the shadow secretary of state for the use of henry viii powers , and that is because we need to be flexible . the last time we had similar legislation was in 2003 . by the time the bill goes through , we will need to have that flexibility built in — i hope it goes through at pace , because it really matters to our broadcasters and the industry that it does . as my hon . friend i thank the members of both houses who performed the pre - legislative scrutiny . that has made it a stronger bill , and it is important that the government have largely listened . that shows maturity , and it is why i think the bill will be a success . i echo members ’ comments about ensuring that we use the word “ significant ” and not just “ appropriate ” in proposed new sections 362am and 362ao to the communications act 2003 , because we need to give clarity and send a firm message to ofcom . at the end of the day , ofcom is an independent regulator . it does not represent people right across the country , and it is important that parliament has a voice in pushing or promoting that . the select committee referred in its report to the use of negative statutory instruments by the government . i ask the government to think again slightly . having experienced a variety of legislation , i know that the role of negative sis is well established and that they represent about 80 % of the legislation that we make . they are used to update minor points . however , it is not necessary to leave such elements to ofcom or to take these things to court when parliament can assert that role . i am really pleased about the change in government policy that has led to the parts of the bill that relate to channel 4 . it was under margaret thatcher ’s conservative government in 1982 that channel 4 was created as a way to have a public sector broadcaster that was still state owned but that generated all its revenue privately rather than through the licence fee , and what a job it has done . s4c was , of course , created on the same day . i very much welcome the special status that channel 4 will continue to have , as well as the new powers that give it the freedom and flexibility to produce . i also welcome the commitments still being made to the independent sector , and i know that channel 4 will not suddenly rush to bring everything in - house — far from it . why would it , when the way it has done things so far has been so successful ? i pay particular tribute to its exceptional chief executive , alex mahon , who has been a real champion for channel 4 and the creative industries . long may she flourish . turning to the excellent itv , i suggest that it really needs a level playing field and this kind of opportunity , particularly when it comes to global platforms . the extra burdens put on our public service broadcasters are important to the diversity of the tv that we enjoy , and itv continues to go from strength to strength . just like channel 4 , it has made transformations in its filming . channel 4 ’s portrayal of the paralympics in 2012 has been recognised around the world as a real game changer by the paralympic movement . similarly , itv broadcasts brave coverage of the news and is spending a lot more money on going to some of the most challenging parts of the world . other broadcasters including sky have done similar things . when we give ofcom these powers , we must send a strong message about the robust application and enforcement of prominence for psbs on global online platforms , on terms that enable them to thrive and deliver their remit . much has been said about local radio , and a significant number of local radio stations have been created in suffolk coastal following the significant reduction in bbc suffolk ’s very local content . although i regret that reduction , it has opened up an opportunity for many more broadcasters . i welcome the provisions in the bill to make it easier for local radio stations to broadcast and thrive . on part 7 , there is a lesson for all of us in the light of the leveson inquiry that a knee - jerk reaction to a prominent public inquiry is not necessarily the best way to generate new legislation . i can see why people were so upset , and continue to be upset , when the media seem to have the freedom to trash people ’s lives and reputations , but it was not the right knee - jerk reaction . it is good that we never commenced section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 and are now repealing it . i would be very concerned if the repeal led to a rush of newspapers suddenly departing from the independent press standards organisation or impress . i know that some newspapers have chosen not to use either , but we should not actively encourage that choice through the bill . this is a good bill , and i hope the house will let the government work at pace . the bill is important for the commercial viability and sustainability of psbs , none of which has the benefit of the licence fee , which means that the bbc does not particularly need to work to generate income . i should say that i worked at the bbc for six to nine months before becoming a member of parliament , and it has a very special place in uk life , but it is important that we have a wide range of psbs . the bill will help to keep psbs sustainable for the future . i welcome this debate , and i strongly welcome the departure from the idea of selling off and privatising channel 4 . it has been a very good channel that continues to do a lot of innovative things . that it can develop its own content can only be a good thing , as it shows the importance of public service broadcasting . we should reflect that the bill is going in the direction of proper regulation of the media , while recognising the value and importance of public service broadcasting . we should compare that with the united states , which , since the second world war , has systematically defunded public service broadcasting and has ended up with news values essentially dominated by fox news and nothing else . we should value the principle of public service broadcasting . i am particularly pleased that gaelic and welsh - language stations are not only protected but supported by the bill , as they have greatly increased the speaking of gaelic and welsh , enhancing and developing the culture of both scotland and wales . many of us often criticise journalists , but we very much value the idea of a free press and a free media , which we do not always appear to have . we should think a little more about the multiple ownership of different media outlets across tv , newspapers , radio and so on . the bill is also about trying to keep up with changing technology and a changing media landscape . there was a time when radio was one thing , television was another , social media had not been invented and newspapers were completely separate from all of them . all of those are now essentially merged into one , in some way or another : radio interviews are televised and newspaper articles appear on websites , often with videos . that is not a bad thing — it is often a good thing — but there is a universality to the media , and many people get their information from online sources . however , we should be slightly cautious because we , in this chamber , are all media obsessives , i suppose . we probably read newspapers and listen to current affairs programmes more than anybody else in our society , so it is easy to forget that a significant proportion of the population does not watch very much television , has no access to smart phones , does not know how to use a computer and is completely lost in a digital divide . those people are increasingly isolated and left behind . the bill does not pretend to give an answer to that . i am not sure there is a simple answer , but we should recognise that a growing proportion of the population — not huge , but significant — often loses out on all kinds of information as a result . i will briefly address the question of news values . i believe there is a high degree of bias in the way that a lot of news is reported in our media , notably international reporting on global affairs . if something happens in the usa , europe or whatever war is being followed at that time , be it the horrors of gaza or ukraine , that is news , but if something happens in much of africa , latin america or south asia , it is simply not reported at all . the huge conflict going on in the democratic republic of congo receives almost zero coverage in any of our written or broadcast media . the problems of , say , indigenous communities in ecuador receive no coverage either . we need to think about how we can encourage all our media to have a more global view when they report globally . the bbc has cut back on its global coverage significantly . it can not afford to have journalists all around the world , so it puts them in the best known places — brussels , washington and so on — and has cut back on many other places . the only global channel that currently tries to report on the whole world is al - jazeera , which is funded entirely by the qatar government and royal family . we need diversity in broadcasting as well as in the way in which the news is chosen . that applies to many other issues as well , including the reporting of environmental affairs and debates about global warming . commercial media is driven by the need to make money to survive , so it has no great incentive to do anything other than entertainment , because that is what brings in the audience and advertising . it does not necessarily provide information and education for the population . i realise ofcom has to do a difficult balancing act , but we should be aware that the majority of the population no longer looks at the two alternatives most of us in the chamber grew up with — the bbc and itv — but at a whole plethora of different news outlets . therefore , those people have a wide variety of news issues thrown at them . a number of colleagues have raised issues about local journalism and local papers , which also appear heavily online . i once worked in a genuinely local paper — it was printed on the same site where we wrote the stories and it was part of the community . it then became part of a bigger group , then another bigger group and then an even bigger group . local papers across the country are actually not local at all . they are owned by a media group in a distant place and , if they are lucky , there are one or two journalists in the town in question and they live largely by press releases . my friend , a long distance away and in a completely different kind of community , the camden new journal group , which also includes the islington tribune and other enterprises , is , again , a wholly independent group set up by the journalists who worked on the paper when the previous owners essentially walked away from it . it is independent , it is local , and it is co - operatively run . it is also very , very successful , because it concentrates completely on the news and stories within the local community and tries to bring them forward . having newspapers and radio stations that cover all languages is also very important . we have talked about scotland and wales , but there is also a plethora of communities in this country who want to hear stuff in their own language . i remember speaking in this house , probably from this very spot , in the 1980s , trying to defend london greek radio , which was set up as an independent greek - speaking radio station . it was raided 74 times by the post office and all its broadcasting equipment was taken away — goodness knows what happened to the 74 items of broadcasting equipment . eventually the station was given a licence , and it is now a very successful greek language radio station . there are many other language radio stations all across the country , which is important . it is important for people growing up in bilingual communities to be able to listen to things in their own language , and for young people to feel that sense of belonging to the greek , to the turkish , to the somali or to any other community , as well as being able to communicate in english . that to me is the great value of local radio stations . my final point is about social media . when i go to meetings , i often ask people how many of them ever buy a newspaper . if the audience has nobody in it over the age of 50 , no hand goes up . younger people simply do not buy newspapers at all — they have no relationship with them . they rely completely on social media for their news , information and ideas . we all access social media . we are all driven in social media by various algorithms , some of which are owned by people far away , who have patented those algorithms . they follow us , they follow our interests and they decide what news we ought to have . it is hardly a free media when we are directed to the news that somebody wants us to hear . it is not simple . it is not simple to regulate on what algorithms do , but we should be extremely well aware of it . we should also be aware that it is possible to set up a radio station — unless i am wrong about this bill — that is purely online . there is no regulation of it whatsoever , other than the basics of libel law and things such as that . that is an area that will grow . it is an area that is increasing , and some of the online radio stations have very large audiences indeed . some of them are very good , and some of them less so , but we must be aware of that and the need in the longer term for further regulation and control of the behaviour of algorithms and how they can influence opinion — politically , socially and commercially — and everything else in our lives . we should just take a moment to think of the bravery of many journalists around the world , including those who have been killed in gaza over the past few weeks ; those who are in prison in egypt , in russia and in a number of other countries ; and those who risk everything in order to try to get the news out . they need support and protection in every way possible . i would also like to put it on record that we should reflect quite seriously on the situation facing one of the world ’s best - known investigative journalists — that of julian assange , who has now spent almost five years in a maximum security prison for revealing uncomfortable truths about iraq and other places . journalism at its best tells us the truth . at its worst , it is propaganda for somebody else and somebody very , very powerful . i agree with some of the comments of it is very doubtful that there will be a division on the bill this evening . we have had something of a love - in , with contributions from all parties saying that they support the bill . i do not want to shatter that consensus , but i am going to do so . although it is clear that the opposition are not going to divide the house on second reading , i must say to them that , had they chosen to do that , i would have supported them . i would have done so purely because of the strength of my feelings about clause 50 , which repeals section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 . i believe consistency in this place matters , even though it might sometimes be elusive . the truth is that section 40 of the crime and courts act was part of a conservative - drafted compromise following the leveson inquiry . it was a compromise in which i had a hand , and i am not about to vote against it , today or at any other point . the reason i supported the thrust of the leveson proposals at the time was not despite my being a conservative , but because i am a conservative , and true conservatives believe in accountability . it is true conservatives who , throughout history , have faced down powerful vested interests and it is true conservatives who will always look out for the underdog , whatever the consequences might be . the leveson inquiry followed decades of failure on the part of the press to engage seriously with self - regulation , and the craven failure of this house over 70 years to act on the findings of no fewer than seven inquiries and royal commissions set up during that time . it is often the case that we never quite know when something that is known to be a problem will become a big story — a running story , as we call it in the media . it was the hacking of the phone of milly dowler , the murdered schoolgirl , that made this house decide to act . therefore it was a conservative prime minister at the time who condemned the press complaints commission as wholly ineffective . it was a conservative prime minister who set up the inquiry . it was a conservative prime minister who chose lord justice leveson to lead that inquiry — in part because lord justice leveson was recognised as somebody who respected the press and believed passionately in the freedom of the press , and could therefore be relied upon to come up with a sensible set of proposals . it was a conservative prime minister who wrote the terms of reference of the leveson inquiry and a conservative prime minister who said that that inquiry should make policy recommendations to the government . when that report came back , it was a conservative prime minister who stated on the floor of this house that we could not just say , “ let ’s have one last chance saloon for the press again . ” , because we had done that . when that report landed — all 1,800 pages , in four volumes — my noble friend lord cameron , then prime minister , asked oliver letwin to work out a way to implement the proposals of the leveson inquiry . there followed a series of compromises to accommodate some of the concerns of the press . first , while lord leveson had recommended that there should be a statutory body , preferably ofcom , that would act as the recognition body , that was seen to be problematic by the press . so oliver letwin came up with the rather ingenious idea of establishing a royal charter for the self - regulation of the press . the press then raised concerns that a future government might be able unilaterally to change the terms of that charter simply by bringing forward orders in council . we accepted that that was a very fair concern . paradoxically , the press then asked whether parliament could safeguard the integrity of the royal charter by ensuring that it could be amended or removed only if there were a super - majority of both houses of parliament and , in addition to that , a super - majority in the scottish parliament . finally , there was a lot of discussion about the editors ’ code and who should hold the pen . the media felt that existing editors should always hold the pen on the editors ’ code , which was contrary to what lord leveson had suggested . again , however , to carry the press with us — as it had said that it would work with us if we made the concessions that it wanted — we made that final concession to ensure that the editors ’ code would always be written by the newspaper industry , not by any other independent body . at various stages during those multiple concessions , oliver letwin asked me whether i would help to broach conversations with the opposition parties with a view to forming a cross - party consensus on the matter , and i did so in good faith . at this point , i pay particular tribute to the mother of the house , i hope that you will not mind if i pay tribute to you , madam deputy speaker , in your former guise as opposition chief whip . i remember attending one meeting where it was somewhat presumed that i would be able to turn up on the night with 70 conservative rebels to defeat the government . you probably saw the anguish on my face at the daunting prospect of having to do such a thing . you made everybody else in the room aware that whips ’ offices can , when they put their minds to it , be pretty good at burning off opposition . it is true that the victims of phone hacking were quite concerned about the level of compromise that politicians were making on their behalf . i remember hugh grant being particularly sceptical of that . we got him in and said , “ trust us ; we are going to do this . this is a cross - party consensus : all parties are signed up to it . it will happen . ” it is disappointing that , a decade on , hugh grant is being proved right because of the government ’s actions through the bill . some months after we had put in place the royal charter for the self - regulation of the press , i met sir alan moses , who was the first inaugural chairman of the independent press standards organisation , the industry ’s own regulator . i remember saying to sir alan , “ ipso is making good progress . it is an improvement on the pcc . it would n’t have to do a great deal more in order for it to be a recognised regulator . why does n’t ipso simply seek recognition ? ” he said , “ george , i completely agree with you . however , my contract of employment forbids me from saying so publicly . ” how is that for the freedom of speech that we hear so much about ? sir alan moses , the inaugural chairman of ipso , was subject to a gagging order , no less , that prevented him from saying what he believed to be true . let me turn to the specifics of section 40 , which put in place one of the key provisions of leveson ’s recommendations : the creation of incentives for an industry regulator to seek recognition . that is often misunderstood , for the provisions of section 40 are symmetrical : not only does it protect innocent people who want redress and access to a process of arbitration , but it protects publishers from people with deep pockets who go to lawyers such as carter - ruck or schillings and threaten litigation — through so - called slapps — to intimidate and bully publishers and prevent them from publishing things . had we put that in place and commenced section 40 , if a russian oligarch , for instance , had said , “ if you print that , i will see you in court , ” and all sorts of injunctions came forth from various lawyers , a publisher would have been able to say , “ no , you wo n’t . we will see you in arbitration . ” that would have protected genuine investigative journalism in a way that has never been done before . the right hon . gentleman is making a most interesting speech . he must be aware that the laws relating to libel and so on are completely misshapen , in that it is totally a rich person ’s game . anyone without resources gets threatened with libel and is silenced immediately . they have no recourse to legal aid and no other way of dealing with the situation other than either to accept something they believe to be wrong or to make themselves bankrupt trying to defend themselves . the right hon . gentleman is absolutely right . the truth is that the system of arbitration , backed up by the cost provisions under section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 , protected small , plucky journalists working for small publishers as much as it protected the weak and vulnerable who could not afford legal action . it is important to note that the arbitration system envisaged would only have engaged at all where there was what is called a cause of action , which is to say where people have a case in law . the arbitration system would never have become overwhelmed , since there would have been a sifting process to take out simple complaints about inaccuracy and so forth . in essence , the system would have focused predominantly on the areas of defamation and privacy . we even considered what i used to term the private eye test , which is to say that if we have a publication that for all sorts of ideological reasons has never joined up to anything at all — bear in mind that private eye never even joined the press complaints commission — there was an option for them to be able to demonstrate adherence to the principles set out in the royal charter while not joining a body . there was also a large area of discretion for the courts on an individual case . while there was a strong margin of appreciation in favour of those who signed up , it was not black and white . the clause stated that where it was “ reasonable in the circumstances ” for a court to find a different position , it had the right to do so . i am therefore generally critical , as the house can understand , of the repeal of section 40 , but i welcome the fact that the government have committed to the continued existence of the royal charter on the self - regulation of the press and that they have no intention of bringing forward any order in council to disband the press recognition panel . it is important to recognise that leveson did not recommend that we needed to take a legal provision through an act of parliament to give effect to these cost provisions . his recommendation was that we or the courts could use the civil procedure act 1997 to set civil procedure rules to create a margin of appreciation and an incentive in favour of those who joined an independent regulator . while the government legislated in this place , albeit that they then failed to commence the order , it was entirely understandable that the civil procedure rule committee and the master of the rolls might have felt it inappropriate for them to act in this space . now that the government have signalled their intention to vacate this space , it is entirely open to the master of the rolls and the civil procedure rule committee to make their own civil procedure rules in this space to give effect to the leveson inquiry . let us not forget that that inquiry was established under the inquiries act 2005 and is explicitly referenced in the royal charter . it would be fair and reasonable for the courts to give consideration and weight to that fact . an important duty now falls to the press recognition panel . that body , independent of government , does not need to wait for advice or permission from government ; it is entirely open to the press recognition panel to put together a detailed report setting out its recommendations for what the alternative incentives might be to encourage publishers to sign up to a recognised regulator . it may come up with some useful advice for all parties in this house as they consider their manifestos going forward . in conclusion , i feel that the failure to commence the full architecture of the leveson proposals was a terrible missed opportunity for the press , and i say that as one of the few members on these benches who first came into parliament with a brown press gallery pass . i knew every single one of the journalists in the press gallery and the news organisations they worked for , and i developed a strong appreciation and respect for the individual character of each and every one of those newspaper organisations — even the ones that were often critical of the party on the government benches — as i understood their tradition . those of us who really believed in the freedom of the press and wanted to see the press thrive had in our minds that if it sought recognition , it would become distinguished from social media and other news content . a decade ago , we were already seeing the start of so - called “ fake news ” and the idea put forward by leveson was that a recognised regulator could be used as a kitemark showing a news organisation ’s commitment to ethical journalism . that would be a positive and would restore trust in our press , which had been lost over the years . the idea was that the broadcasting act 1996 , covered today in much of this bill , would affect the regulated broadcasters , but that there would be a much more flexible , self - regulatory model for the press or other online content . we could also see , even 10 years ago , that there was going to be a convergence between broadcast media , who would increasingly have online news content in written form , and the print media , who would increasingly be online and would have podcasts and video content . therefore , a blurring would take place in the traditional distinction between broadcast and print journalism . the great beauty of the architecture we put in place with the royal charter for the self - regulation of the press is that it enabled there to be multiple regulators , some of which might specialise just in online news and others that might specialise just in the printed press , with everything else in between . had we implemented that , we would have had a great opportunity to restore trust in the truthfulness and integrity of journalism in this country . there is a final reason why i believe it was short - sighted of the press not to do this . when the courts see that over a period of time there has been intransigence on the part of the press to take standards and genuine accountability seriously , and a craven weakness in this house to act in this space at all , they will make public policy decisions . it is no good complaining about slapps , privacy injunctions and so forth when this house has failed to do even the most basic things to put in place some sensible protections for our civil society . so i would have opposed this bill on those grounds alone , but i recognise that it contains much else that has cross - party support . i hope that the government will consider removing clause 50 at a later stage of our consideration of this bill . it is a pleasure to speak in this debate on the media bill . i wish to focus narrowly on part 4 , which sets out the provisions on public service broadcasting and gives ofcom powers to draft and enforce a video - on - demand code . the bill proposes to do that by extending audience protection measures , for example , age ratings and content warnings , that are currently enforced for broadcast media and bbc iplayer - only to all on - demand programme services . a number of colleagues have mentioned how the media landscape has evolved rapidly in our lifetimes . i remember the black - and - white telly in my parent ’s lounge , with the choice of just three or four channels . i remember traditional linear tv , where we would all sit around to watch a programme and we would not answer the phone or the doorbell , because if we missed something , that was it . i remember my grandparents getting a vhs player before we did in the 1980s and my grandma would record “ thomas the tank engine ” and “ postman pat ” for us , and we would binge watch it when we went to stay with her . of course , so much has changed since then , and when my children were young , they did not even understand the concept of linear tv . i remember going to stay with a family member who did not have a smart tv at the time and my children did not understand how they could not watch “ octonauts ” right that minute . so much has changed in our lifetime . of course , there are many wonderful aspects of media programming in this country — we have some fantastic content that is the envy of the world — but there are also some not - so - wonderful aspects , and there is lots of material out there that may be entertaining for adults but we definitely do not want children to see . that is the point of the ofcom broadcasting code , which says for broadcast tv : “ 1.1 : material that might seriously impair the physical , mental or moral development of people under eighteen must not be broadcast . 1.2 : in the provision of services , broadcasters must take all reasonable steps to protect people under eighteen . 1.3 : children must also be protected by appropriate scheduling from material that is unsuitable for them . ” a healthy family media environment relies on parents being able to keep children safe by making sure they do not accidentally come upon content that is not suitable , and on parents having control over what is suitable for their own children . it goes without saying that young children should not be watching violence , sex , extreme language and all those kinds of things . we accept that as a society , and that is why we have rules and systems in place to help parents and to stop children seeing unsuitable content . our traditional on - demand media — cinema , dvd and vhs — is regulated by the british board of film classification , which is a highly respected organisation that has been going for over 100 years . we are all familiar with the littles triangles telling us that a film is a u , pg , 12 and so on . our tv scheduling is regulated by the broadcasting code , which mainly relies on the watershed so that broadcasters do not put out programmes before 9 pm that children should not see . on demand presents a new challenge for our broadcasters , because the watershed does not apply . by definition , all the content is available all the time , and therefore parents can not rely on the fact that it is before 9 o’clock to know that a particular programme is safe . some commercial streaming services have voluntarily adopted the bbfc ’s ratings . netflix is a good example . it has adopted the u , pg , 12 and so on ratings . that is really important , because the bbfc ratings are some of the clearest , most transparent and most respected in the whole world . the bbfc even has an app now where parents can look for any programme or film , and it will tell them the rating and exactly why that rating is given , so that parents can be fully informed about what children are going to watch . i visited the bbfc a couple of weeks ago — i highly recommend that to members ; it is more than willing to give briefings — to see how it rates films , trailers and programmes . it is a hugely impressive organisation , with enormous levels of trust from not just the content creators but the public . it surveys 10,000 members of the public every four years to ask them about their attitudes to violence , swearing , sex , drugs and so on , to feed into its ratings , so that there is buy - in from the public . some services have not opted into the bbfc ratings or produced a suitable rating system of their own . the most significant player in this category is disney+ , which has an opaque system of age rating that can not be trusted by parents . for example , the film “ avatar ” , which i think most people would say is suitable for children , has a rating of 16 + , and yet a quite sinister adaptation of “ a christmas carol ” that involves nudity , horror , child molestation , forced prostitution and a depiction of child drowning has a rating of 9 + . the problem is that when parents see that kind of discrepancy , and when the ratings are opaque and there is no transparency about why things are rated in the way they are , parents just remove the passwords , because they think , “ i want my child to be able to see ‘ avatar ’ ” . but in removing the passwords or changing the settings on their account , they inadvertently enable children to watch a lot of material that is not suitable for them . clearly , disney+ and other streaming services need to be subject to the same standards as broadcast media . if material is unsuitable for children , it is unsuitable whatever the platform on which it is viewed , and it is the intention of the bill to remedy that . clause 38 will require ofcom to review audience protection measures used by providers of all on - demand tier 1 programme services , including those that do not have their headquarters in the uk . in other words , the bill seeks to ensure that what we might call the new media — streamed content — is subject to the same audience protection measures , such as age ratings , content warnings , parental control and age assurance measures , as traditional and linear material such as cinema , dvd and broadcast tv . so far , so good — that is a laudable and much - needed aim — but my question to the government is , why reinvent the wheel ? why task ofcom with another review and developing another new code , when we already have a world - leading regulatory framework in the bbfc ? why not instead extend the remit of the bbfc — an internationally trusted organisation — and an age - rating system understood by millions who already use streaming media , so that those familiar ratings logos of u , pg , 15 and so on are visible on each and every programme on every streaming platform ? indeed , 88 % of parents find the bbfc ratings on netflix extremely helpful , so it would make sense to standardise these ratings across all the major streaming platforms . the platforms would pay the cost — that is how the bbfc is funded , so it would not require a massive expansion of the bbfc . for example , the bbfc gives the code and the transparent materials for rating to netflix ; netflix polices itself , and every so often , the bbfc will check that it is fully compliant with the way it regulates itself . there would be a clear advantage to extending that universal rating system across all streaming services : it would not be reinventing the wheel , and there are also serious question marks about ofcom ’s capacity to deliver on both the requirements in this bill and the significantly increased requirements placed on it by the passage of the online safety act 2023 . i urge the minister to consider amending the bill to use the bbfc and its code , rather than ofcom , to achieve the aims of clause 38 . i also urge the minister to consider extending the remit of the bill ’s audience protection provisions beyond broadcast and streaming to all uk - accessible video content , including online . i appreciate that that would be a very significant expansion of the bill , but if its purpose is to bring audience protection regulation up to date with the current and future media landscape , we are just skirting around the issue if we do not include online content . indeed , the principle of part 4 of the bill is to create that parity between online and offline . nowhere is that more needed than in the much less regulated online space . i say that principally because of the proliferation of unregulated hardcore pornography on the internet — pornography that would be completely illegal in the offline world , on dvds or on streaming services — that is now being viewed by millions , including children , and causing immense societal damage . we are not talking about erotic magazines passed by teenage boys around the bike sheds , but extreme , violent , hardcore , repulsive and completely illegal material : violent rapes , violent assaults and incest . it is the most unimaginable , degrading material — material that is illegal offline on traditional platforms , and always has been . if we are rightly convinced that it matters what people watch — that it matters that children are protected from strong content , whether they are watching it on tv , streaming it on demand or seeing it on their phones — we have to apply the same principle to pornography . a third of the internet is pornography ; pornhub has more users than twitter , instagram , netflix , pinterest , zoom and linkedin put together . it is a $ 100 million industry , and algorithms draw users into more and more extreme material . the government ’s own research makes the link between viewing violent pornography and violence against women and girls , yet the average age of first viewing in this country is 11 . we will never turn the tide on violence against women and girls unless we recognise the role of pornography in conditioning men and boys to link violence with sexual pleasure . that is why i urge the minister to bring online pornography content within the scope of the audience protection measures in the bill . the online safety act will go some way towards helping in this space : its age verification provisions will make it harder for under-18s to access that content . i very much commend the government on accepting those amendments , which had cross - party support . but that act missed an opportunity to crack down on online porn that would be completely illegal in the offline world — material that still proliferates online and , even with the new protections , will of course be accessed by some children . again , the bbfc can have a role here , because it is the bbfc ’s role to regulate offline porn , such as dvds , and certain adult websites . it has a very effective working relationship with the adult industry and with payment providers , so if the bbfc establishes that a particular adult platform has on it a video that is illegal and should be taken down , it can contact the payment providers and ask them to deny payment to that website until the video is taken down . does my hon . friend agree that the bbfc is also a very established brand that is trusted and understood by the public , so the public would themselves have confidence if the bbfc was given the ability to act in this space ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . that is exactly why i am calling for the bbfc to have a much greater role in this bill , but also for that role to be extended to the regulation of pornography . the bbfc has been going for over 100 years ; other countries look to it and its ratings . it has buy - in from the public and from the content creators themselves , so it is perfectly placed to provide the kind of regulation and expertise we need . if we really want online and offline parity when it comes to audience safety — of course we do , because it does not matter where this content is viewed ; it will have the same effect — we must look to include pornography in the scope of the bill . i would go so far as to say that if the government really want to leave a legacy of child protection and reducing violence against women and girls , nothing is more important than preventing access to hardcore pornography that is , and always has been , illegal in the offline world . i welcome the bill ; it contains some excellent provisions . obviously , i have focused narrowly on one aspect of it , but i ask ministers to consider mandating that all streaming services use the bbfc ’s age verification ratings , and extending audience protection measures to online content , especially violent pornography . i am delighted to see this bill before the house today . it has been a long time coming , and its arrival is extremely welcome . from a very young age , i wanted to be a broadcaster . so committed was i to this goal that i wrote to bbc radio oxford at the tender age of 15 , and complained that it did not produce any programmes for teenagers . somewhat to my surprise , it told me to put my money where my mouth was , and invited me to go in and make them myself . my first series covered such weighty topics as spots and school dinners ; life as a teenager was rather more naive in that long ago era . after university , i joined the bbc full time in its news and current affairs department , working as a reporter , presenter and producer . as the spice girls , in a blaze of colour , heralded the launch of channel 5 in 1997 , i perched on the newsroom desk to prove that current affairs did not have to be stuffy and boring . indeed , so keen were we to be modern and relevant that i was even allowed to have a cameo as a newscaster in “ shaun of the dead ” . there being no greater possible pinnacle of an on - air career , i then moved behind the scenes to work as an adviser to itv for several years . i recount this biography not as an application to make a late appearance on the new series of “ i ’m a celebrity”—i feel these benches have provided enough victims of that recently — but to show that i have been lucky enough to have some experience of the subject matter , and perhaps more importantly , to illustrate the wide range of the country ’s public service broadcasting landscape . all the broadcasters i have mentioned — the bbc , channel 5 and itv — have in common that they are psbs , and it is on them that i wish to devote most of my remarks . public service broadcasting is not just about news and current affairs , crucial though they are ; it is about reflecting all parts of our country , not just the metropolitan elites , not just london — and , indeed , not just england , as we have heard from our colleagues in the scottish national party . it is also about showing programmes that do not just have an immediate commercial rationale . as one example , i think channel 5 ’s commitment to children ’s programming is commendable , and its recent commission of an animated series with disabled lead characters for pre - school children is incredibly important . as the government themselves have stated , this bill will “ reform the legal framework for the regulation of public service broadcasting ” , and there can be no doubt that this is sorely needed , because the media and entertainment landscape , as we have heard several times , has changed almost beyond recognition over the past 20 years . my right hon . friend let me add some other cultural memories of that year . jemini — with a j — scored “ nul points ” at eurovision , cilla black quit “ blind date ” live on air and jonny wilkinson scored a last - minute drop goal that won the rugby world cup and the nation ’s hearts . that same year , 2003 , more than 19 million viewers were glued to their screens as the “ coronation street ” serial killer richard hillman abducted the platts and drove the family into the canal . it was must - watch tv the length and breadth of the country . however , those tv audience numbers for drama could only be dreamt of today . indeed , the entire tv landscape is almost unrecognisable , thanks to rapid developments in technology that have in turn brought about fundamental changes in viewing habits . today , 75 % of households have an on - demand streaming service , and according to ofcom , 90 % of 18 to 24 - year - old adults bypass tv channels and head straight to streaming , on - demand and social video services when they are looking for something to watch . while the likes of netflix , prime and disney offer a panoply of great programming , they are not bound by the requirements on our public service broadcasters — the bbc , itv , channel 4 and channel 5 . the responsibility that psbs bear to present socially valuable content carries a burden , and it is only right that that is reflected in the regulatory regime . key to achieving that is ensuring due prominence for psbs on whatever device . at its simplest , there is no value in having high quality , publicly important programming if viewers can not find it quickly and easily , yet that is increasingly the risk with the market as it is today . we are all familiar with the shift away from an on - screen list of tv programmes — electronic programme guides — to a set of tiles along the bottom of our screens , but whereas the lowest numbers on an old epg could easily be reserved for the psbs , the tiles can be set in pretty much any order . inevitably , those linked to the highest paying providers of content , or otherwise prioritised , are frequently the first to be seen . it can take many clicks on the remote to get to the smaller psbs : channels 4 and 5 . i strongly welcome the government ’s provisions on the new online prominence regime , and i agree with itv that a “ clear mandate ” must be “ given to ofcom for a muscular implementation of the bill … on terms that enable psbs to flourish and deliver their remits . ” i would be grateful if the minister set out in a little more detail how he envisages ofcom implementing the new regime , and said whether he supports the regulator taking a bold stance to ensure that global companies comply with our decisions in parliament for an appropriate level of prominence for our psbs . i would also be grateful for reassurance that a secondary power to designate platforms will be cast as broadly as necessary to achieve the aims of bill . for example , that could potentially include gaming consoles , which i understand from much younger colleagues are often used to access psb content . this is not just about watching the box in the corner of the room . the requirement to give psbs prominence can not become a licence to print money by the platforms carrying them , so i welcome the bill ’s proposals for a must - offer , must - carry regime , with an arbitration scheme as a backstop . the other side of the coin is that the privilege of prominence carries with it a duty , and nowhere more so than at the bbc . it must do better if it is to retain its hallowed position as the most prominent and privileged of the psbs , because it is funded by all of us through the licence fee . i have said before that i believe that that funding method is living on borrowed time ; it is an anachronistic and frankly regressive tax . during my 12 years as a magistrate , i saw the painful impact , particularly on some women , of the draconian measures that are taken against those who can not afford to pay that licence . although the future of the licence fee is not part of today ’s debate , the funding model puts additional and serious duties on the bbc as a psb . i fear that the bbc is no longer the organisation that i joined more than 30 years ago . we are all familiar with the growing torrent of criticism , not least of aspects of its coverage of the middle east crisis . although there are undoubtedly some phenomenally good and brave journalists in the field , there have also been some appalling and inexcusable lapses in the bbc ’s reporting . responsibility for that must go to the very top of the newsroom , and it must always be remembered that the facts are far more important than a juicy headline . i fear that if it is not careful , bbc verify will have to start scrutinising its own newsroom , and that was not the idea of it in the first place . leaving aside the newsroom , when pensioners started paying the licence fee again , i had a large number of them in my constituency . three of them made contact with me , one of whom objected , and two of whom were trying to pay in an old - fashioned way that the bbc ’s agents could not cope with . that shows that the licence subscription system works pretty well and is welcomed . i say to my hon . friend that if we had the alternative to the licence fee , or some other kind of household impost , we would have a subscription where the bbc stops serving everyone in the country , and starts serving those who choose to pay . as it is a national institution , we still face the question put by the canadian , graham spry , nearly 100 years ago : “ it is a choice between the state and the united states . ” let us choose the state and make it a public broadcaster still . i thank the father of the house for his intervention . he raises important points , which is why we will need to have a long and detailed debate on the future of the licence fee at another time . i chose my words relatively carefully in saying that i hoped the licence fee was living on borrowed time , rather than saying that the end must come immediately . my hon . friend raises points that will have to be addressed before we move to another system , but i personally feel that the current model is not sustainable in the medium to long term . it is not just me who has raised concerns about the bbc . according to the reuters institute for the study of journalism , trust in bbc news has plummeted from 75 % in 2018 to 55 % in 2022 . that trend clearly can not continue . i have focused my remarks principally on broadcasters , as that is where the majority of my experience lies , but i will turn for a moment to the print media . i listened carefully to the comments of my right hon . friend rose — i will make one or two more points , just in case they answer my right hon . friend ’s question , but i will certainly give way in a moment . as chair of the all - party parliamentary group on media freedom , it was a surprise to me that it was ever considered appropriate to oblige the publisher to pay the costs of both sides in a legal claim , even if the publication won the case . i know that that stance was taken by the organisation reporters without borders . thankfully , the bill will put that right , and i am reassured that the industry ’s own actions in recent years in setting up its own regulator , ipso , and beefing up internal complaints handling procedures have proved effective , without the need for further statutory intervention . obviously , the easy way for any publisher to avoid the cost provisions would be to seek recognition . what is it about the leveson recommendations that my hon . friend disagrees with so much ? what in the royal charter for the self - regulation of the press does he find objectionable and impossible for a news organisation to subscribe to ? as i just outlined , my principal concern is about the suggestion that a publisher would have to pay the loser ’s costs , irrespective of what those costs could be . the government have considered the many factors in play in reaching this decision . it is important to say that this is not a licence for newspapers to print whatever they wish — i hope that is understood in my local area by the bucks herald and the bucks free press . there are undoubtedly times when the line between fact , comment and insinuation seems to be ever thinner . self - regulation brings with it a responsibility to get articles right first time , as well as to give sufficient opportunity for a right to reply and appropriate space for both sides of the story . i hope that newspaper owners and editors will take the opportunity of the repeal of section 40 to redouble their efforts to justify the trust we are putting in them to work to the highest standards . the media bill is essential to securing the long - term future of our public service broadcasters . more than that , it gives confidence to our nation ’s wider creative economy . we need to ensure that the bill gets on to the statute book as smoothly and quickly as possible . i have not proposed amendments or called for specific changes because i recognise the urgency . the industry has worked closely with the department for many months , if not years . as a result , i believe that we have before us a bill that is well thought - out , fit for the future and fair to all . i am delighted to give it my enthusiastic support . it is a pleasure to follow my hon . friend the media bill we are debating is the first piece of media legislation for 20 years . the media landscape has changed beyond belief in the last two decades — it is vastly different from the world we lived in 20 years ago — so the bill is vital to supporting broadcasters and audiences in the modern age . as the media landscape has changed , it is important that we support legislation without delay to give certainty to this important sector . we should recognise that the bill will probably govern the media landscape for the next 20 years , so it must be forward - thinking , outward - looking and open , just as the previous legislation was . i declare my interest as chair of the all - party parliamentary media group and the all - party parliamentary group on commercial radio . let me start by saying that i welcome the bill , which responds well to the needs of the sector . because of time limitations , i will focus my remarks on three specific areas of the bill . i will do something that i rarely do , and put television ahead of radio . i welcome the government ’s commitment to simplifying the existing remit for public service broadcasters . psbs are what make our television landscape renowned around the world , but they face unprecedented competition for viewers , programming content and talent in an era when global streaming services such as netflix and amazon prime are producing original content and becoming increasingly dominant in the market . it is good that we have more content producers , but even better , they are choosing to make content here in the uk because of our regulatory framework . tv prominence is about ensuring that uk viewers can easily find public service content that they value . we are living in an increasingly global marketplace , but there is still an appetite for programmes that reflect british values . in fact , around seven in 10 uk adults want uk life and culture to be represented on screen , and a similar number agree that psbs make programmes designed for uk audiences . why is it important that we introduce legislation to protect psbs ? surely , viewers will want to watch the programmes that they make . until now , in return for providing public service content , the government , through ofcom , have allocated frequencies to broadcasters . in a relatively uncomplicated world , those channels have been easy to find on electronic programme guides : itv , and stv in scotland , on channel 3 ; channel 4 and channel 5 on their respective channels . once someone has tuned in their tv to the nearest transmitter , they press the number on their remote control and the channel is there . in a future world where the internet is used to deliver the linear tv and video on demand , the tech companies and platforms will decide where products and programmes appear . in fact , at the moment , if samsung or lg decided not to include the bbc iplayer app on their tv screens , there is nothing the bbc , uk viewers or the government could do about it . if amazon decided to double the charge for channel 4 ’s on - demand service to appear on its fire stick , there is little channel 4 could do about it . from speaking to channel 4 , i know that when amazon moved the location of the channel 4 app on the fire stick , there was a significant alteration in the viewing of channel 4 . it matters where the apps are located on the relevant platform . if we want to make sure that british viewers can easily find bbc , itv , channel 4 and channel 5 , and stv in scotland and s4c in wales , we need to agree the framework that will ensure that platforms carry those services . i fully support that . i also urge the government to look carefully at using the word “ significant ” rather than “ appropriate ” . that will determine where the channels are found on those platforms . i wholeheartedly agree that it is not just about the schedule . as i said earlier , i was not aware that we had a schedule . we do not use freeview ; we open the fire stick or playstation and look at the apps . the prominence of the apps is important . if someone does not have terrestrial tv or an aerial hooked up , that is the only way that they are able to consume the public service broadcast content . there may be an age divide that determines whether someone looks at an electronic programme guide or the radio times , or whether they just look for a tile . the notion that viewers want to continue to use linear tv is important . that is why it is so critical that we legislate in the right way to make sure that british viewers can find it . the changes in the bill will impact channel 4 more than any other psb , given its unique publisher - broadcaster licence . channel 4 ’s status , introduced by the conservative government back in the 1980s , has significantly aided the development of the independent production sector in the uk over the last 40 years , which is now worth nearly £ 4 billion . the removal of the publisher - broadcaster restrictions will allow for channel 4 to produce its own content , as opposed to simply commissioning or acquiring all of its content from third parties . why does that matter ? for the first time , it will allow channel 4 , when it produces content , to own the rights for that content , which it can then sell around the world , creating another stream of revenue which will allow products and programmes to be funded on channel 4 . the government have announced plans to increase channel 4 ’s independent production quota as part of the changes . however , there will be many small production companies in areas such as the north - west of england , which have seen a rapid growth in independent production businesses , who are still unsure about the full impact the changes will have for them . will the minister , in his response , expand a little more on what the changes will mean for those businesses and give some assurances that they will still be able to thrive once channel 4 receives its new licence and the bill receives royal assent ? channel 4 has indicated that it will maintain its existing commitment to spend 50 % of its budget for main channel commissions outside london . that is really important to regional production . ofcom has announced that it will be consulting on whether changes will need to be made to channel 4 ’s regional programming making quotas . is the minister able to provide a timeline for that consultation , so we know when any changes will come into effect ? i want to touch on local tv and echo some of the comments from other hon . and right hon . members . i have received representations from the local tv networks who are concerned that the current bill does not guarantee local tv service prominence in the new tv ecology , and neither does it grant powers on a par with those of local radio services . at some point , the sector will start to provide streamed linear programme services . will the government be giving consideration to including local tv as part of the licensed public service channel designation in the bill to help ensure sustainability for the sector ? it really is important that there is an understanding for this sector going forward , because it is making decisions today on the future of its business plans . finally on tv , if we are looking to the next 20 years , because this is the only bill we are likely to see in the media landscape , we should be conscious that the previous broadcasting bill ran for 20 years . on the government ’s management of a digital terrestrial television switchover , i have been reassured in my conversations with the minister that he wants terrestrial television to remain accessible for the foreseeable future . i very much agree with him on that . when he is summing up , could he give an indication of the criteria he might want to set before broadcast tv services on freeview are considered for switch off ? that was in place for dab digital radio . there was a clear criteria in terms of when that might happen . things have moved many , many times over the years , but it would be helpful for the digital terrestrial sector to understand what the government might be thinking . before i turn to the provisions on radio , may i put on record my congratulations to all those who have worked in commercial radio over the past 50 years ? independent local radio , as we once knew it , celebrated its 50th anniversary just a few weeks ago . it was 50 years ago in october since lbc and capital radio arrived on our airwaves in the capital , 50 years since radio clyde in glasgow launched and 50 years since brmb in birmingham launched . they were the four stations in 1973 that appeared on our am radios . over the 50 years , we have seen a plethora of local , regional and national stations arrive on am , fm , dab and now online via radioplayer and smart speakers . today , commercial radio is delivering record audiences . back in the early 1980s , we were all convinced that video was going to kill the radio star . actually , radio is in rude health . we have regional brands , national stations and hyperlocal services focused on their own towns and cities that are doing remarkably well . we should all recognise in this house how strong commercial radio is today and how much we value the services that people who work in that sector provide for us . there is unanimous agreement across the bbc , and across commercial and community radio , that the bill , on the whole , works for radio . it contains crucial measures that will help to safeguard the future in the face of changing technology and shifts in listening habits . the radio sector continues to deliver significant public value , providing trusted news , entertainment and — particularly important — companionship for about 50 million listeners every week . uk radio broadcasters make a substantial contribution to the creative industries , and bbc and commercial radio combined generate more than £ 1.5 billion in gross value added for the uk economy . i especially welcome the provisions to support the future of the uk radio industry on voice - activated smart speaker platforms , and the removal of outdated regulatory burdens such as music formats on analogue licences for commercial radio stations . when there was a limited number of stations in each market , it was right for the government to regulate the number of stations that could provide each particular type of service , but today , when there are a great many services , it should be for the market to decide . if country music is not working , it is possible to switch to jazz without spending too much time bothering the regulator . there are , however , a few parts of the bill that i should like the minister to clarify for the industry . part 5 deals with the safeguarding of local news and information on dab services , and it would be helpful if the minister could explain how those powers will work in practice . for instance , how would a multiplex decide which services must carry local news ? would the multiplex owner be responsible for the enforcement against a digital sound service provider , or would that be the responsibility of ofcom ? what would happen if a service carrying local news stopped broadcasting ? would the obligation be transferred to another service holder , or to the multiplex owner ? as for ofcom ’s new role in producing guidelines for the regular broadcast of local news , can the minister tell us when and how ofcom will be consulting on that process ? part 6 contains clauses relating to futureproofing . will there be scope for expansion of the provisions to cover on - demand and online - only radio content provided by uk broadcasters , as opposed to linear content ? finally , may i ask whether the government will consider an amendment to protect access to radio in cars , which still accounts for about a quarter of all radio listening , by bringing non - voice activated infotainment systems within the scope of the bill ? i want to touch briefly on the proposals “ for the repeal of section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 ” , a decade - old provision that has never been brought into force . while i appreciated the opportunity to observe the perspective of my right hon . friend the reason i do not agree with my right hon . friend is this . the leveson report recommended a system of “ voluntary independent self - regulation ” , envisaging “ a body , established and organised by the industry ” which “ must be funded by its members ” . lord justice leveson said that that body should include all the major players in the industry — national newspapers , and as many regional and local newspaper and magazine publishers as possible — “ although i am very anxious that it remain voluntary ” . what lord justice leveson actually said was that the members of the body would only be recognised as a regulator if they had sought recognition from an organisation called the press recognition panel . leveson very clearly rejected the model put forward by lord black in the other place , for the very good reason that there was no independent accountability and no body to recognise that independent regulator . i am grateful for my right hon . friend ’s comments and i recognise his knowledge in this area . he was involved at such a deep level that he has experience and expertise in this field . for me , the media regulatory landscape has changed significantly since section 40 was introduced , with the independent press standards organisation now regulating nearly 2,000 print and online titles , including the vast majority of uk national , regional and local newspapers . i feel that that has left us with an obsolete law on the statute book which was never enacted . removing the section was a conservative party manifesto commitment in 2017 and in 2019 , so i welcome its proposed repeal by the bill . in concluding my remarks , i want to offer my thanks to the minister of state , department for culture , media and sport , my right hon . friend it is a privilege to follow my hon . friend we all know that local media are under immense pressure and i have been very outspoken about bbc local radio cuts . bbc radio norfolk is a beloved institution in my parts and i still think that those cuts were misguided and wrong . they will devalue the product , push content creators into online from radio and put pressure on our regional newspapers , which are already struggling as a result of the ever - dwindling numbers of people who are reading print content . local media are often far more adept at reporting on the stories our constituents want to hear , because the regional stories affect the reader directly . local news programming often aims to be the authentic voice of its viewers and their interests , with viewers often telling stories directly through their own words . one of the purposes of the media bill is supposed to be to ensure that viewing migrating to new streamed platforms does not result in viewing and revenues to public service broadcasting being lost . however , while supporting the largest broadcasters , the bill does little to protect the rights of viewers to access local news and information on their new tv sets . so for me , the fundamental issue of the bill is the definition of public service channels . under the bill , local tv services are no longer included in the definition , which means that ofcom will have no power to secure carriage and prominence for internet - delivered local tv streamed services on smart tv sets . the reality of that is that if local tv services can not replace lost viewing and revenues , they will ultimately no longer be able to deliver their services . for one of my local tv stations , that ’s tv , it will have a direct impact on its business . i have always supported that ’s tv , along with its presenter charlie walden and now his successor , ryan wykes . both have been young , talented and keen reporters and i have greatly enjoyed working with them . it is important that they flourish and are not lost , because the demise of local tv would be an irreversible loss to the media landscape . where the bill has got it right is in reducing the regulatory burden on commercial radio stations . they , too , are stretched for advertising revenue but contribute enormously to the rich fabric of community media . to give an example of just how popular local radio is in my region : according to rajar data from sept 2023 , 199,000 people across norfolk and north suffolk tuned into greatest hits radio , including 18,000 in north norfolk alone . that is more than bbc radio norfolk , at 125,000 , and more than heart norfolk , at 174,000 . that echoes what my hon . friend the member for warrington south has just said . of all the people listening to the radio in norfolk , around one in every five listened to greatest hits radio for at least some of the time . it is vital that stations like these are supported and enhanced so that brilliant reporters such as tom clabon can continue to report on the latest and most important regional topics , day in and day out . i often find these journalists have a freer rein and more flexibility than journalists from , say , the bbc , with its strict schedule on what they can and can not report . one concern is that increasing the visibility or accessibility of public service broadcast content could have an adverse consequence in providing unfair competition to regional newspapers that , as we know , are under great pressure across the country . i am blessed to have a brilliant local newspaper that covers all of my constituency — i know not all mps have that . there is almost a clamour to buy the north norfolk news on a thursday morning , and i pay tribute to up - and - coming journalists such as adam barker and the local democracy reporter george thompson , and not forgetting stuart anderson , the community editor , who was the first reporter to interview me after my election , we have worked together productively ever since i was elected to inform the population of all things in north norfolk . as i end , i can not fail to mention protections for non - commercial community radio stations . i have one of the best , poppyland radio , based in northrepps village hall . a bunch of wonderfully energetic , creative and talented presenters and volunteers enable it to broadcast 24/7 but , like every other local media channel , it needs protection to ensure its viability . i hope consideration can be given so that , across the spectrum , it is not just the broadcasting giants that are protected but also the content creators who represent our smaller communities . without them , the journalists of the future may never be given the opportunity to learn their trade , and then we and the communities we represent would all ultimately suffer . on a point of order , mr deputy speaker . i apologise to the house for neglecting to mention at the start of my remarks that i have recently accepted hospitality totalling £ 345 from sky , a broadcaster , to see madonna — it was unforgettable . i apologise for failing to mention that in my remarks , and i wish to correct the record . i hope that is acceptable . thank you for your guidance . i thank the hon . lady for her point of order and for correcting the record as quickly as possible , for which i am grateful . i am pleased to welcome the introduction of the overdue media bill . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . it has been 20 years since the last major piece of broadcasting legislation was passed , and the media landscape has since changed dramatically . in 2003 , the words “ television ” and “ radio ” described the devices on which we consumed our visual and audio content . now these formats have taken on a life of their own . television can be viewed without a physical tv , and radio can be streamed online . as this technology has evolved , so have the habits of audiences and the competitors entering the industry . in the television space , for example , global streaming services now challenge our public service broadcasters for the attention of audiences . rather than being linear channels , they offer catalogues of content for the price of a subscription . against this backdrop , we are pleased to finally have the media bill before us today , in order to give our public service broadcasters and uk radio the tools they need to thrive in the digital era . just last week , i again met stakeholders from across the industry , including from public service broadcasters , radio providers , online platforms and consumer groups . while not everyone agreed on every detail of the bill , what was clear from the discussions was the almost unanimous desire to get the bill through as soon as possible . too much time has already been wasted in bringing forward the changes that are needed . around 18 months ago , ministers first introduced the “ up next ” white paper , which contained many of the crucial measures we see before us in the bill today , including welcome commitments to modernise the public service remit , to ensure public service content is prominent and easy to find on smart tvs and streaming sticks , and to futureproof the listed events regime , so that uk audiences can enjoy important national sporting moments . however , rather than getting on with providing support for the broadcasting industry , the government chose to waste a year pursuing doomed plans to privatise channel 4 instead . thanks to widespread opposition , ministers finally made a very welcome u - turn on that proposal . that was a huge relief , not least for those local economies across the country who rely on channel 4 spending over 50 % of its commissioning budget in areas outside london , which although i am pleased to welcome the bill today and look forward to supporting it in its passage , it is vital that the bill is subject to proper parliamentary scrutiny . indeed , the bill has already made distinct progress from its draft thanks to pre - legislative work by the culture , media and sport committee , which has rightly received praise from across the house . the chair , the hon . member for gosport ( dame caroline dinenage ) , outlined some of the accepted changes , including creating exemptions to the 30 - day requirement , making progress in closing the streaming loophole in the listed events regime and adding much - needed protections to help facilitate a smooth end to channel 4 ’s publisher - broadcaster restriction . however , i would like to highlight some areas where clarification may be needed , starting with the first four parts of the bill , which primarily focus on visual media . it is important that the bill seeks to ensure that the public service remit is not overly complex or onerous . however , the voice of the listener and viewer , the media reform coalition and the culture , media and sport committee have raised concerns that removing explicit requirements to cover genres such as entertainment , drama , science , religion and other beliefs could lead to a decline in the provision of content in those areas . will the minister clarify what impact assessment the department has carried out on how the new remit will impact the nature of public service content , particularly with respect to the removed genres ? in the light of changing viewing patterns , it is sensible to provide psbs with some flexibility to meet their remit through on demand programming , but the broadcast 2040 + campaign and others have been clear that public service content on linear television must still be protected and maintained . if it is not , we risk excluding those who live in rural areas , do not have an internet connection and an older generation that rely on being able to watch television in its traditional format . will the minister explain how the department will work with ofcom to hold our psbs to the highest standards , and ensure that they continue to deliver quality content for as many people as possible ? further scrutiny will also be needed to ensure the new video - on - demand code is not just a copy and paste of the broadcasting code , and is tailored to the needs of the on - demand environment , a point touched on by discussions will also be important to ensure the new prominence regime achieves the aim of making sure public service content is easily accessible on smart devices , properly considers how best to implement prominence for the likes of s4c , as raised by a number of hon . members , and takes into account legacy devices . on listed events , we need further clarification on how the findings from the government ’s consultation into digital rights will be implemented . we do not want a situation where a major sporting event takes place overnight and the next day the online clips are behind a paywall , meaning people in the uk are cut off from viewing it . let me move now to the radio - focused parts of the bill — particularly part 6 . i am aware that there has been a wider concern over the drafting and intent of the clauses . thanks to the occasions that i have been in this chamber to discuss the importance of preserving bbc local radio , the minister will be well aware by now that i believe that radio services are of vital importance to people up and down the country . i am therefore also in full support of the changes that the bill makes to ensure that uk radio services are available and easy to access , without undue interruption , on devices such as smart speakers . it is with that support in mind that i wish to ask the minister how he plans to ensure that these measures are futureproofed , as i know that is something that radiocentre and the bbc have raised , too . for example , does the department have any plans to extend the regime where necessary , for instance , to include car entertainment systems ? further , despite the rapid growth of podcasts and online - only radio , these forms of audio are not covered by the bill ’s protections . does the minister believe that that , too , should be kept under review ? although i support these measures , i know that the likes of tunein , techuk , and google , which i met last week , have shared some concerns over this section . again , i am pleased that the department has taken on board some of the important recommendations made by the culture , media and sport committee to ease some of those concerns . however , i would still be keen to hear from the minister on what work the department has carried out to ensure that smart speaker platforms are able to prepare internally for carrying radio services through their preferred routes . it is vital that radio is protected in light of changing listening habits , and , in order for this regime to be successfully implemented , there must be proper engagement with platforms and technology stakeholders to ensure that they are able to comply . although the media bill is overdue and in need of some clarifications and adjustments , i am very pleased to welcome it today . i look forward to working closely with ministers and members from across the house on ensuring that we seize this once in a generation opportunity to update media regulation , and create the change needed to ensure the future of our brilliant british tv and radio . may i start by thanking all hon . members who have contributed to this debate ? it has been wide ranging and remarkably consensual with one small exception . nevertheless , there has been much support for what the government are seeking to do in this bill from right across the house . that is perhaps in part because it has been a long time in the preparation , but i think that it is all the better for that . the government decided to publish the bill in draft form , and we have consulted very widely since that time . we are extremely grateful to the culture , media and sport committee , under the chairmanship of my hon . friend a number of hon . members , in the course of their contributions , remarked on the extraordinary transformation that has occurred in the media landscape over the past few years . it is absolutely the case that things such as epgs and linear television are becoming less and less part of everyday behaviour , particularly for young people who access television content . it has meant that there has had to be a succession of bills to update the legislation to take account of the changes . i have to admit that i was a member of the broadcasting bill standing committee in 1996 . i led for the opposition in the committee on the communications act 2003 , and i am delighted that i shall be taking this bill through committee in the next few weeks . i particularly welcome the offer from the shadow secretary of state to work with us in taking the bill through and i look forward to working with her and as i say , there has been a remarkable transformation in the media landscape . we are particularly grateful for the recommendations , and i want to touch on one or two made particularly by the culture , media and sport committee . i have always had a high regard for that committee , having spent 10 years chairing it . as ever , the report produced by the committee was extremely valuable and we were delighted that we were able to accept a large number of the recommendations . there were one or two recommendations on which we took a different view . in particular , one that has been raised by a number of hon . members , including my hon . friends the members for gosport and for folkestone and hythe ( damian collins ) , was the distinction between “ significant ” and “ appropriate ” . a number members have recommended that we should use the words “ significant prominence ” , rather than “ appropriate prominence ” . the government have taken a different view , which can be summed up as , “ significant can indeed be appropriate , but appropriate is not necessarily significant . ” s4c is an example of that . in wales , it is very important that it should be highly visible , and therefore significant prominence in wales is appropriate . on the other hand , it would not necessarily be appropriate for s4c to have significant prominence outside wales . it should obviously be findable , but it has a different position outside wales . the government remain of the view that “ appropriate ” is a more fitting term than “ significant ” . i am very conscious of what my right hon . friend says , but “ appropriate ” is so wishy - washy and it is clear that promoting s4c in parts of england is not what people are talking about . it is leaving the decision to ofcom and judges , as opposed to the very clear signal from parliament that we want our public service broadcasters to be high up the list right across the country , including on the platforms we discussed earlier . as i say , in a large number of cases the appropriate position would be a significant one , but we think there needs to be a degree of flexibility to take account of regional differences , and therefore that ofcom is perhaps better placed to look at each individual example and decide the appropriate level . i come to channel 4 , which has featured a lot in the course of the debate . channel 4 , set up by a conservative government , has played an extremely valuable role in the broadcasting landscape . i think it was my hon . friend the member for folkestone and hythe who rightly said that when channel 4 was created , the independent production sector did not really exist at all . the indie sector was created by channel 4 and the fact that channel 4 , as a broadcaster , commissioned all its content from the indie sector . as a result , we now have one of the most successful independent production sectors in the world , which to some extent does not now need the support of channel 4 ; it is making content for all the broadcasters , in this country and beyond . nevertheless , it is the government ’s decision that , to provide channel 4 with a more sustainable revenue base moving forward , we should allow it to acquire an in - house production capacity if it so chooses . we talked to the independent production sector at length and felt it was appropriate that in those circumstances we should increase the independent production quota to 35 % , in order to provide some underpinning of the independent production sector . we hope that that will ensure the continued sustainability of the independent production sector at the same time as giving a channel 4 an additional ability to diversify its sources of revenue . there have been a number of contributions from north of the border during this debate , particularly around gaelic broadcasting . one measure in the bill for the first time makes the provision of services in the minority languages across the united kingdom part of the public service remit . that did not exist before . it is for ofcom to decide an appropriate level of provision , but there is now a requirement that there should be such provision . i hear what the right hon . gentleman is saying , but should there not be something a bit stronger and more stringent in the bill than a decision by ofcom further down the road , and should it not be written into law , as several members have asked ? well , i would say to the hon . gentleman that clause 1 makes clear that there should be a significant quantity of “ audiovisual content that is in , or mainly in , a recognised regional or minority language ” . just to correct the minister , it does not say “ significant quantity ” ; it says “ sufficient quantity ” , but there is no definition of “ sufficient ” . we are concerned about the fact that that word has not been defined . we want a reasonable amount of gaelic content to be available . i apologise to the hon . lady . she is absolutely right : it does say a “ sufficient quantity of audiovisual content ” . that will be a matter for ofcom to rule on . mg alba already gets support — i am grateful to the minister , who i appreciate is trying to be helpful . what we are asking for specifically is that protection in law be given to gaelic in the way it is given to other languages , such as welsh . i hope that that can be done with cross - party consensus , which is what we have done over the course of the past few decades in this place . i share the right hon . gentleman ’s wish to see continuing provision both for the welsh language and indeed for gaelic . i would , however , draw a contrast . some have suggested that there should be some kind of equity in the support given to the welsh language and to gaelic . of course , s4c receives funding from the licence fee , but that is in recognition of the fact that there are nearly 1 million welsh speakers in the united kingdom . mg alba gets some support from the scottish government , which is welcome , but there are approaching 100,000 people in scotland who speak gaelic , so there is a big contrast between the two . there is a reason there have been so few gaelic speakers over the centuries : acts of parliament , from the education ( scotland ) act 1872 onwards — and even before . the point is that we are looking for redress and hope , not for more of the same . i mean that in a good spirit ; i hope it does not come across otherwise , because i know that the minister is not that type of person . i am trying to communicate to him the urgency of the real need , expressed by a number of members , for that kind of support . i am afraid that all i can say to the hon . gentleman is that the government recognise the importance of continuing support . we expect the bbc to continue providing a channel in gaelic , in the form of bbc alba , and we welcome the fact that mg alba produces content through an arrangement with the bbc and with the support of the scottish government . we have now , for the first time , put into the public service remit the requirement to provide “ a sufficient quantity of audiovisual content ” . that is a significant step forward , even if it does not go quite as far as snp members would like . the provisions covering radio have been rightly welcomed and described by my hon . friend a number of hon . members raised local television , of which the government remain supportive . however , at the moment , local television is not available through apps , so including it in the provisions for prominence was not appropriate , but we will of course keep the situation under review , should it evolve in future . the government are consulting on the future of local television . my hon . friend the government ’s objective , however , is to ensure that protection is in place , rather than necessarily to specify that it has to be done by the bbfc . it will be left to ofcom to oversee that , and it already has a lot of experience in this area . it enforces the broadcasting code , which also requires age - appropriate broadcasting . as my hon . friend rightly said , that was traditionally via the watershed , although that is now changing with the move to on - demand tv . ofcom also undertakes other protections such as parental controls and so on , so it is not just age rating . i entirely share her view that the bbfc does an excellent job , and i hope that all services will consider using it when reaching decisions , but the government are not at the point of wishing to mandate that at this time . i utterly appreciate what my right hon . friend is saying , and i can see why the government and ofcom do not want to be overly prescriptive about how this regulation is done , as long as the content is well understood . will he just reflect on the fact that this set of labels is well understood by the public ? everyone knows what a u is , and everyone knows what an 18 is . in that sense , it would be an effective vehicle to establish that people understand the content . in determining whether the requirements are met , ofcom will have to take into account whether the rating is easily understood by viewers . even if that is not necessarily the bbfc ’s triangles and particular age ratings , it will nevertheless need to meet those requirements and ensure that viewers can easily see what is an appropriate age for that particular content . i am a viewer of disney+ along with the other services , and i agree with my hon . friend . disney+ has some content that is highly appropriate for children , but it has other content that is perhaps less so . i move on to the repeal of section 40 , which is of concern to a number of members . i very much welcome the contribution of my right hon . friend my right hon . friend my hon . friend i have seldom agreed with the right hon . member was also right to pay tribute to news reporting from around the world and to point out that it does not get enough attention . i was delighted to be able to attend the society of editors ’ media freedom awards recently , where sky received two awards for its reporter stuart ramsay ’s reports from myanmar about the civil war raging there . that is a terrible conflict that does not get enough attention . the right hon . member is right that it is important that both psbs and other providers continue to bring us reports from right around the world about things that we would otherwise be unaware of . lastly , i welcome the right hon . member ’s stressing the importance of local newspapers . i have been deeply concerned about the decline of local newspapers for many years . i am delighted that the bbc ’s local democracy reporting service , which was established following the last charter , continues to support local newspapers , and we continue to look for other ways to support them . this has been an excellent debate . i look forward to working with all members and the opposition as we take the bill into committee . i am delighted to commend the bill to the house . question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read a second time . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the following provisions shall apply to the media bill : ( 1 ) the bill shall be committed to a public bill committee . ( 2 ) proceedings in the public bill committee shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion on ( 3 ) the public bill committee shall have leave to sit twice on the first day on which it meets . ( 4 ) proceedings on consideration shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion one hour before the moment of interruption on the day on which those proceedings are commenced . ( 5 ) proceedings on third reading shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion at the moment of interruption on that day . ( 6 ) ( 7 ) any other proceedings on the bill may be programmed.—(mark fletcher . ) question agreed to . king ’s recommendation signified . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that , for the purposes of any act resulting from the media bill , it is expedient to authorise the payment out of money provided by parliament of any increase attributable to the act in the sums payable under any other act out of money so provided.—(mark fletcher . ) question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that , for the purposes of any act resulting from the media bill , it is expedient to authorise : ( 1 ) the charging of fees under the act ; and ( 2 ) the payment of sums into the consolidated fund.—(mark fletcher . ) question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft justification decision ( scientific age imaging ) regulations 2023 , which were laid before this house on question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft immigration ( age assessments ) regulations 2023 , which were laid before this house on question agreed to . i rise to present a petition on behalf of the constituents of linlithgow and east falkirk . there can be no doubt that we are in the midst of a worsening cost of living crisis , and i fully support my constituents ’ call for a uk meal card scheme , which would help to reduce household food bills and support local businesses on the high street . the petitioners therefore request “ that the house of commons urges the government to follow the lead of 35 other nations around the world and examine the introduction of a uk meal card scheme to provide a tax - free allowance for employees to spend on ready - to - eat food and non - alcoholic beverages , implemented by updating hmrc ’s existing tax exemptions list for employee benefits and expenses , with a graduated tax treatment to ensure that support is targeted at those on the lowest incomes . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of linlithgow and east falkirk , declares that the uk remains in the grip of a worsening cost of living crisis , with inflation causing significant pressure on household food budgets ; further that there is a need to support companies who are struggling to find workers and to support individuals to find and sustain work , to bolster the uk ’s labour market and boost economic growth , and notes that innovation is needed to tackle the challenges we face . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to follow the lead of 35 other nations around the world and examine the introduction of a uk meal card scheme to provide a tax - free allowance for employees to spend on ready - to - eat food and non - alcoholic beverages , implemented by updating hmrc ’s existing tax exemptions list for employee benefits and expenses , with a graduated tax treatment to ensure that support is targeted at those on the lowest incomes . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p002876 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(mark fletcher . ) i am going to begin where i left off on “ if i am to suppose a case in which scotland unanimously , or by a clearly preponderating voice , were to make the demand on the united parliament to be treated , not only on the same principle , but in the same manner as ireland , i could not deny the title of scotland to urge such a claim . ”—[official report , that principle of equity was at the heart of my private member ’s bill , and was again articulated in amendment ( j ) to the recent king ’s speech , tabled in my name . each was consistent with the motion passed by this house that endorsed the principles of the 1989 claim of right , which acknowledged “ the sovereign right of the scottish people to determine the form of government best suited to their needs ” . however inured this house has since become to the aspirations of the people of scotland to live in a normal independent country , support for independence is holding steady at around 50 % without a single leaflet being dropped through a letterbox . that number is rising steadily , and will continue to climb . the independence genie is not for going back into the bottle . of course , that growing support requires a mechanism through which to express its effect and place beyond doubt the will of the people . my scotland ( self - determination ) bill is explicit about the conditions necessary to bring that mechanism into play , and is clear that the power to legislate for a referendum requires a democratic mandate from the scottish public . since 2014 , that criterion has been met in successive general elections to the scottish parliament , most recently in 2021 , when a majority of msps were elected on a manifesto commitment to deliver an independence referendum . this evening , i intend to set out how that must now happen , and how it can be put beyond the wiles of intransigent london - led parties for good . one of the most invigorating aspects of the 2014 independence referendum campaign was the explosion of interest and engagement in all aspects of policy , and the healthy workplace , coffee house and pub debates across scotland . back then , as a movement , we were unafraid to have differences of opinion and to propose various solutions to decades - old problems . most importantly , we spoke truth to the distortions of the unionist better together “ no ” campaign . that appetite for truth and facts is something we must rediscover . our movement must demand that if we are to make progress towards independence . the first issue we must come to terms with is that another section 30 independence referendum is not going to happen for the foreseeable future . as a consequence of the scottish lord advocate ’s folly in arguing a poorly crafted question , the uk supreme court made it clear that in the absence of an equitable mechanism for self - determination across these islands — such as the one i have proposed — any referendum on scottish independence is a matter reserved to london . in some ways , the supreme court ’s judgment was perhaps helpful . it said in paragraph 81 — this is the reason the court stopped the referendum — that even if the referendum did not have any legal powers , because the uk government had not signed up to it , the ballot box would carry authority , which would force the uk government to recognise that authority and therefore cause a change to the union . by stopping the referendum , the supreme court has now opened another avenue for scotland , which we will maybe touch on later . that , of course , is using elections . i thank my hon . friend for that intervention , and that is a key element of my contribution to this debate . put plainly , a section 30 order to temporarily transfer those powers to the scottish parliament is entirely in the gift of westminster . that underscores the unavoidable truth that our parliament is in reality part of the fabric of the british state and is increasingly being squeezed under the heel of whitehall . securing mandates to ask for a referendum on independence only to be rebuffed is now the equivalent of monty python ’s parrot that has ceased to be . it is as stone dead as a mandate can be . the tories have become increasingly bolder in this regard , and while they persist with their assertion that this is a voluntary union , they refuse to set out the means of withdrawing consent . this government have also made it clear that they will plunder scotland as a cash cow until the wind stops blowing . westminster plans to rob our resources at its leisure . there is no way , even if the first minister were to ask , that the prime minster would agree to an independence referendum in his final months in office . in a westminster hall debate on this subject , the minister responding this evening claimed that “ the benefits of being part of the united kingdom have never been more apparent . ” where is the benefit for the one in three households in scotland living in fuel poverty ? where are the benefits for the north - east of scotland when the acorn carbon capture and storage project still waits for a go - ahead from the uk government ? the minister proclaimed that scotland has “ one of the most powerful devolved parliaments in the world . ”—[official report , but scotland remains powerless to stop the plunder . when the hon . member speaks about opportunities to improve the lives of people in scotland , we could of course do that through our nhs , through our education system , through our justice system and through local government . all of those issues are devolved fully to the scottish government and the scottish parliament , but they are of course ignored by the snp and green government — the nationalist government — because they are always focused on independence , rather than on the real priorities of the people of scotland . i thank the hon . gentleman for his intervention , but i would be the last person to speak for the snp government in scotland . i refer back to my party leader ’s excellent tenure as first minister , and the meaningful difference he made to the lives of the people of scotland . this comparison with a devolved scotland in the united kingdom is as silly as comparing the performance of northern ireland and stormont in the united kingdom with dublin and an independent ireland . ireland has a € 10 billion surplus this year , rising to € 20 billion next year . the uk , with a deficit of around £ 170 billion , is unable to build small hospitals on small hebridean islands , whereas ireland is funding nurses over the border . order . i am not sure who the hon . gentleman was intervening on there . i was extending the debate . mr deputy speaker , i am equally—[interruption . ] yes , my hon . friend has put anyway , the treasury is happy to siphon off £ 11 billion in tax receipts from oil and gas this year alone , and we are sending south 124 billion kwh of energy , which is enough to power scotland ’s needs fifteen times over . as my hon . friend as for an incoming uk labour government , now bedecked in union jackery — the tories will like this bit — the leader of the opposition has made it clear that his priority is continuity with tory economic and social policy , and he intends to continue london ’s plunder of scottish assets . do not be confused : it was british labour that first hid the truth of the mccrone report from the people of scotland — a truth kept secret by successive labour and tory administrations for 30 years . neither party has protected our economy or our communities , so why should we trust any of them now ? they each may persist with the claim they have “ no selfish strategic or economic interest ” in the north of ireland , but we know the opposite is true of scotland , where the strategy is wholly economic and top - to - tail selfish . i am sitting here as a determined , strong - willed , proud unionist who believes that the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland is always better together . northern ireland is part of that , and i very much wish to see scotland be part of that , so the hon . gentleman and i will disagree . does he accept that when it comes to the british government , the amount of money that comes from here to keep scotland going can never be ignored ? he talks about the trade downwards , but the trade is also upwards and that can not be ignored when it comes to the financial implications . better off together , always . the hon . gentleman hit the nail on the head when he said that we will absolutely not agree on anything he said . in answer to that point , the republic of ireland is costing the uk nothing after leaving , therefore if scotland goes it will save you a fortune — order . stop intervening on mr hanvey to intervene on the person who intervened on mr hanvey . you ca n’t knock his enthusiasm , mr deputy speaker . neither the labour nor the conservative parties have protected our economy , and any fantasy that pleas for more devolution will be accommodated by labour are pie in the sky . north of tyne mayor jamie driscoll recently accused the labour opposition of censoring , diluting , and striking down key recommendations contained in a report by former prime minister and mp for kirkcaldy and cowdenbeath , gordon brown , on the constitution and further devolution across the uk . those forlorn attempts to prevent the “ break - up of britain ” by refusing to devolve power away from london will serve only to boost the case for scottish independence . mr brown ’s attempt to reframe the debate to one of “ change within britain versus change by leaving britain ” has been utterly dismantled by his party leader and increased the urgency for independence . all that leads us to the position where scotland urgently needs a robust strategy that not only deals with the facts of the day , but overcomes that central westminster hurdle of the denial of a democratic process . the alba party , and our scotland united colleague , the hon . member has hit the nail on the head . the referendum door is slammed shut , and there are three ways that the snp government at holyrood could trigger a plebiscite on scottish independence . of course , the resignation of the first minister was very awkward and difficult , but a majority of two thirds of msps can vote , or by using section 31a of the scotland act 1998 the two - thirds majority can be altered to a simple majority . that was not communicated properly in light of the supreme court , and those who did not communicate it properly should have set the record straight or at least apologised . i think they should set the record straight so that mps , msps and the wider public clearly understand that point . i thank my hon . friend for that important piece of information . it underscores that there is need for much more robust and firm action from the scottish independence movement , to push forward the case for independence . as i said recently , independence will not fall into our laps . it is something that we have to pursue with vigour and absolute determination . that approach reinstates the position of the national movement prior to devolution . as with all democratic expressions , the threshold would be a simple majority of votes cast for all independence parties — a threshold that was achieved on the last list vote for the scottish parliament . that approach is supported by the expert legal opinion i obtained from highly distinguished academic and legal practitioner in international law , professor robert mccorquodale . he said that “ the people of scotland are distinct within the uk and have a right to self - determination . ” , and subsequently that “ the right to self - determination applies to the people of scotland . ” he went on to state : as the people of scotland are a people for the purposes of the right to self - determination , they can exercise it . the choice of the means to exercise it is for the people to decide and not for the state . ” furthermore , he explained that the uk , as a signatory to multilateral international human rights treaties , has “ expressly accepted that the right to self - determination is a human right ” and “ not just as an international legal principle — which is binding under international law on all states . ” these are not obscure or arcane points of law ; they are precise and purposeful . i understand why the uk government do not want to hear the facts that professor mccorquodale set out , but i can not comprehend why others are steadfast in their refusal even to acknowledge that landmark legal opinion charting the correct lawful and democratic course to self - determination and independence . the alba party ’s amendment to the recent king ’s speech repeated the democratic principles contained in my scotland ( self - determination ) bill for the recognition of the right of the people of scotland to self - determination by amending the scotland act 1998 . that would transfer the power to legislate for a scottish independence referendum to the scottish parliament . let me deal with the supposed gold standard of a section 30 order . such an order on its own is not a gold standard ; it was the process of negotiation and agreement that led to the signing of the edinburgh agreement that was the gold standard . let me be clear that any democratic vote in favour of self - determination is the only standard required , providing that that is the clear and unclouded purpose of any such vote — unless of course the uk government do not want to recognise democratic elections as legitimate expressions of the will of the people . the hon . member is making an excellent point . an unscheduled holyrood election would precisely be in that category . it would make the world stop for a moment and see whether scotland was to choose independence . that power rests with msps at holyrood if they want to do that . the hon . gentleman is making really important and valid observations . those are the key tactics that we need to adopt . whichever uk prime minister comes next , while they may have every technical right to stifle , subdue or ignore the scottish parliament , the british state has no locus to limit the inalienable human rights of the people of scotland or the march of our nation . yet in this union , that is precisely where scotland finds its democracy — denied . that flies in the face of commitments given . in margaret thatcher ’s memoirs , she said of scotland : “ as a nation , they have an undoubted right to national self - determination ” . john major , when prime minister , said of scotland that “ no nation could be held irrevocably in a union against its will ” . the commitments contained in the smith commission ’s agreement , which was signed by all scotland ’s main political parties , said that “ nothing in this report prevents scotland becoming an independent country in the future should the people of scotland so choose . ” scotland will only ever become an independent country as and when the majority of the people of scotland choose that path , yet that requires a democratic mechanism that is constitutional and satisfies international legal precedent . from gladstone to thatcher , no one until now has had the gall to seek to constrain the scottish people ’s democratic right to self - determination . i have made this point many times , but it bears repeating . democracy is not a single event ; it is a continually evolving process that demands opinions be tested and retested regularly . i anticipate that the minister will reel off the usual rebuttals and crow about how we have had a referendum , but he should know this . as an option , a referendum has been put beyond reach by westminster and whitehall , but scotland will adapt . each and every election from hereon in can and will provide a platform on which the people of scotland can have their say on their consent to this union . consistent with professor mccorquodale ’s opinion , that would pave the way to where “ a clear majority of people representing scotland … indicate their approval ” for independence , “ but it should not be done by the scottish parliament , as the latter is within uk domestic law . this could be done , for example , through a convention of elected and diverse representatives from across scotland with a clear majority in favour . ” scotland ’s separate constitutional tradition is best summed up by lord cooper , in the case of maccormick v. lord advocate : “ the principle of the unlimited sovereignty of parliament is a distinctively english principle which has no counterpart in scottish constitutional law . ” the uk government face a choice : give serious consideration to bringing forward legislation for an equitable mechanism for self - determination , as exists on the island of ireland , or face that test at every election in future . in international law according to human rights declarations , the decision on scotland is the purview of the people of scotland , not of any london party . in the constitutional tradition of popular sovereignty in our great country , it is the people who remain sovereign , and it will be the people of scotland who decide . yet again , the government ’s position on a further independence referendum is well known . rose — i want to make some progress , and i will give way another time . [ interruption . ] the hon . member has only just sat down , and i will deal with his points in due course . people across scotland rightly expect to see both their governments working together . our relentless focus should be on the issues that matter to them , their families , and their communities . scotland ’s bright future as part of the united kingdom is better served by focusing on tackling the cost of living , and on growing our economy so that everyone has access to the opportunities , skills , and jobs that they need . [ interruption . ] hon . members on the opposition benches shake their heads , but i know that those are the priorities of my own constituents in the borders . it is disappointing how disconnected those members are from the priorities of the constituents they represent . when it first came to power , the snp set out to emulate the labour party of old , and it certainly has succeeded . the nationalist movement is now even more divided than the far left . the snp and alba compete to see who can be the most reckless in their demands . they are constantly trying to get one up on each other on independence . but it does not matter who is pushing separation — humza yousaf or alex salmond . scotland does not want it . unlike the divisive nationalists , we unionists on the government benches are all about bringing people together . as hard as it might be , let me try to find a point of unity with the hon . member for kirkcaldy and cowdenbeath . perhaps we can agree that scotland wants to be free — free of the snp . as a member of the alba party , surely he can agree that we are fed up with humza yousaf , michael matheson ’s ever - changing stories and their endless incompetence and deceit . while scottish conservative mps are securing millions of pounds - worth of investment in our constituencies through uk levelling - up funding , elected members of the hon . member ’s party want a giant independence thermometer to be constructed somewhere in scotland . i wish i was joking . the independence thermometer is the brainwave of the alba party ’s most recent recruit from the snp , ash regan msp . personally , i would rather see taxpayers ’ money spent on schools and hospitals , but if the hon . member insists , will he tell us where he wants the independence thermometer to be located ? has he lobbied the chancellor for funding for this ridiculous proposal ? will the thermometer be made of mercury , or is that where he got the idea from — another planet ? i thank the minister for giving way . however , i need to go back to my first request for an intervention . he was complaining about using valuable time in the chamber for a debate on the constitution , but it is his government who are finishing early ! it is his government who have just launched a new king ’s speech and can not fill the parliamentary programme with enough business to keep the chamber going . i hope he will correct the record that it is not me who is impeding parliament doing its business ; it is a lack of action from his own government . what a load of baloney ! this government have an action - packed programme set out in the king ’s speech . we have an ambitious programme for scotland and all parts of the united kingdom . we are focused on the issues that matter to the communities we represent , not on endlessly debating another independence referendum . the uk government remain as determined , focused and committed as ever to getting on with the job for the people of scotland . that is best demonstrated by what we are doing on the ground . the uk government are delivering £ 2.7 billion of levelling - up investment across all parts of scotland . as hon . members on the nationalist benches know , that investment includes : £ 1.5 billion for 12 scottish city and regional growth deals ; £ 160 million for two investment zones in the glasgow city region and north - east scotland ; £ 52 million for two freeports , focused at the inverness and cromarty firth and firth of forth regions ; and £ 817 million for locally - driven plans and priorities , regenerating town centres , improving vital infrastructure , supporting businesses , and spreading skills and opportunities to communities everywhere . i thank the minister for giving way . he mentioned the unionists on the conservative benches . i am a unionist on the opposition benches , as are my party . it is clear that the polls in scotland are indicating less of an interest in independence than there was . is that because the realisation of those in scotland is that they see their future within this great united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland — better together ? is it because the financial benefits of westminster and the government here to scotland , and indeed to wales and northern ireland , are so good they would never really want to leave ? the hon . member makes very valid points , but the key point is that support for independence and another independence referendum in scotland is falling . the voters in scotland , certainly in my constituency in the scottish borders , are getting wise to the failures of the scottish snp government in edinburgh , and they recognise the benefits of remaining part of a strong united kingdom . that is because the uk government and the scottish government are working together on so many areas to make our communities better — driving economic growth , supporting the scottish economy and delivering for scotland . i can give some further examples . we can see it through the scottish seafood industry action group , where the uk government regularly engage with the scottish government and the scottish seafood industry to consider a range of important issues , including access to labour , energy costs and export opportunities . we see it through the fiscal framework review , where the uk and scottish governments reached a fair and responsible agreement . both governments reached a compromise for the benefit of the scottish economy , while keeping us on track with our fiscal objectives . and we are investing more than £ 100 million in scotland ’s innovation economy through the strength in places fund and glasgow innovation accelerator . our close collaboration with the scottish government in this area was further underlined by the agreement signed between uk research and innovation and scottish enterprise earlier this month , which aims to streamline innovation support for scottish businesses . levelling up is already making a real difference to all regions of scotland . it is bringing advanced manufacturing jobs to the glasgow city region , data driven innovation jobs to south - east scotland , and life sciences jobs to the highlands and north - east scotland . it is saving the community on fair isle with a new ferry , bringing clydesdale horses back to pollok country park , and revitalising town and city centres from greenock to aberdeen , and cumbernauld to elgin . it is helping communities to protect and restore their treasured buildings and facilities , whether it is the last pub in lochranza on arran , or a permanent home for st david ’s brass band in gorebridge . [ interruption . ] the members on the nationalist benches shout those initiatives down . this is funding from the united kingdom government going into communities the length and breadth of scotland — something that they seem to strongly oppose . i am disappointed by that and i know the communities they represent will be disappointed by it too . before the minister gets down to the mugs and glasses that we provide for the cub scouts , along with any other crumbs from the table , let me make this point . he mentioned “ two governments ” in scotland . what inefficiency ! norway , ireland , iceland and denmark have one government each , and they are outperforming scotland in the united kingdom . if scotland is doing so well in the united kingdom , why do norway , ireland , iceland and denmark not want to join the uk ? it is because they know that it is not a good place to be . they look at scotland and wales and they see places that are doing better , just as they are doing better . if the campaign for scottish independence is doing as badly as the minister says , why not hold your referendum now ? you ’d win , surely , would n’t you ? but you know full well that when the scottish people engage , independence will happen ! the hon . member speaks of “ crumbs from the table ” , but this is significant investment going into communities across scotland . scotland is receiving hundreds of millions of pounds through our levelling - up agenda and a record block grant amounting to more than £ 40 billion , but snp members oppose and fight every bit of the investment that this united kingdom government are making there . i am saddened by that , and i know that the residents and communities that the hon . member and his colleagues represent will also be disappointed by the hostile and negative response to investment that has been used to improve the communities that we represent . together , the uk government ’s interventions will drive innovation and long - term economic growth , restore pride in place , and help cities , towns and villages in every part of scotland to flourish . the hon . member for kirkcaldy and cowdenbeath referred to “ the sovereign right of the scottish people ” to determine their future , and i suppose that that reference to self - determination gets to the nub of the debate that he has initiated . in 2014 , the year of the referendum on scottish independence , there was consensus between the uk government and the scottish government — both scotland ’s governments — and there was consensus in civic society in scotland and consensus across the population of scotland , which is why both governments agreed to the referendum . the ultimate act of self - determination , of course , came in september 2014 , when , in record numbers , the people of scotland turned out to vote to remain part of the united kingdom . my hon . friend has given a strong defence of the union , as he always does in his ministerial role and on behalf of his constituents . would he agree that the nationalists have had more plans for scottish independence than michael matheson has had excuses for his £ 11,000 ipad bill ? and just like that £ 11,000 ipad bill and their different plans , none of them are honest , none of them are convincing and none of them have the support of the scottish people . my hon . friend is absolutely right . we hear about plans for referendums endlessly from snp members . i just wish they had a clear plan for ferries in scotland or a clear plan for scotland ’s nhs and scotland ’s schools , but no — referendums , referendums , referendums are all we hear about and all they talk about . i would like to finish by reminding those on the nationalist benches yet again that our different views on the constitution should not distract both of scotland ’s governments from working together to tackle the sheer challenge of delivering growth , easing pressures on the cost of living and supporting the nhs . the scottish parliament is one of the most powerful devolved parliaments in the world , and we believe that the devolution settlement strikes the right balance . this united kingdom government are committed to devolution , and we are working collaboratively and constructively with the devolved administrations , including the scottish government , to deliver better outcomes for the citizens of scotland and the entirety of the united kingdom . question put and agreed to . house adjourned .