i am delighted to take part in this debate , as i am always grateful for the opportunity to praise and defend our public services , particularly our state schools , and the millions of people , including the vast majority of my constituents , who rely on them . the opposition motion “ regrets that the government has decided to impose vat on independent school fees ” . well , i regret that the last tory government did all they could to deliberately and carefully dismantle , defund and destroy our public services , including state schools , for 14 years—[interruption . ] there is a huge amount that i could say , but we are pushed for time and many members want to speak , including lots of government members . i know there are more of us here — every day . indeed . there is a lot that deserves to be said about our schools . we have heard many conservative members ask about the impact . they suddenly care about the impact of decisions made in this place , but where was their talk of impacts over the past 14 years ? in st helens north , 81 % of schools have had real - terms funding cuts since 2010 — over £ 3 million in real terms , or £ 239 for every pupil . where was the consideration of impacts when the last government cancelled labour ’s building schools for the future programme and watched our state schools crumble ? where was the talk of impacts when the last government presided over a send system that is failing over 1 million children and that their own education secretary described as a “ lose - lose - lose ” ? where was the concern for impacts when standards fell , which they did ? madam deputy speaker , it is a genuine honour to address you and the house today . it is a privilege not just to represent the derbyshire dales , but even to be there , because it is truly an area of outstanding natural beauty — known to many hon . members , i am sure , because it is a destination for millions . but its great appeal also presents a problem , particularly for younger people who are looking for housing . the little house building that takes place is more or less matched by the number of properties lost to second homes , holiday lets and airbnbs . that results in the highest house prices in the region , which puts houses out of the reach of many young people ; they end up moving to other areas to find more affordable housing . that in turn means fewer young families , fewer children , and schools with falling numbers on roll . small businesses , including farms , pubs and restaurants , suffer as well , as they struggle to get staff due to the lack of affordable accommodation nearby . it is vital that we address this housing crisis . i pay tribute to my predecessor , sarah dines , who stood up for the farming community in the dales — something that i very much hope to continue . i have had the pleasure of meeting her predecessor , lord patrick mcloughlin , who is in the other place , and i hope to benefit from his vast experience of the constituency . the main industries in the dales are , unsurprisingly , tourism , leisure and hospitality , quarrying and agriculture . i am hopeful that the new government can secure a veterinary agreement with the european union to give our struggling farmers a boost . i have spent much of my first few weeks in the role speaking to farmers to try to understand what the key issues are for them . food security in an increasingly unstable world must be a high priority . the dales have great historical significance . according to the anglo - saxon chronicles , in the 10th century , the northern kings met edward the elder at the bakewell burh and chose him as father and lord , effectively creating the entity that we call england . arkwright ’s mill at cromford is the birthplace of mass production , and of course it was powered by renewable energy . i recently met the arkwright society , which is restoring the site for the benefit of future generations and doing a great job . i also recently met jamie needle , who has taken on masson mill , another of arkwright ’s mills . he is also concerned with the delivery of hydroelectric power from the derwent — what goes around comes around . stone from derbyshire quarries was used in the reconstruction of parliament in the 19th century , and the founder of modern nursing , florence nightingale , lived in the constituency , at the family residence at lea hurst . she said : “ nursing is a progressive art such that to stand still is to go backwards . ” today ’s health service is barely standing still . we need to reduce the waiting lists , and to get 3 million working - age people back to work as soon as possible . i know from my time as the mayor of derby that so much of the good being done daily never makes the headlines ; good deeds do not appear to sell newspapers or attract advertising . but in my few weeks in this role , i have already met some remarkable people and organisations who are making a difference in the constituency and further afield . aquabox is a cromford charity with over 80 volunteers who supply clean water solutions to people in disaster zones . terry eckersley at river network provides social housing and a second chance to people in need . bakewell youth theatre has been led and inspired by sue stones for 46 years . i appreciate that this is on a different scale , but chatsworth house , no less , has given invaluable opportunities to children and young people in the area by having a “ takeover ” day at the world - famous stately home . i must mention ben woodroffe , our world champion toe wrestler — yes , it ’s a thing . as well as being a great bloke and a champion , he has raised valuable funds for the mental health charity mind . i hope the days of having a reasonable expectation that one ’s children will do well in life are not over , but they seem at least to be on pause . a lack of housing , a reduction in opportunity due to political decision making , unrestrained social media and a climate crisis mean that my children are entering adulthood with much greater uncertainty than i did . as a foster carer of teenage children for 24 years , i know how tough things are for young people in general , but they are much harder for young people leaving care now than they were just a few years ago . local authorities are running on fumes , so the support has diminished , and unfortunately the prejudice against care - experienced young people still persists . the new government must work towards fixing the broken children ’s social care market , address the lack of placement sufficiency , and end the profiteering from vulnerable children that is driving our local authorities to the brink of bankruptcy . i did not even bother to check with the commons library , but i am very sure that i am the first former singer of a progressive metal band to be elected to this house . although my gigging days are behind me , i think , i am extremely pleased that the labour government will seek a deal with the eu to help our touring acts , who suffer no end of red tape when trying to get to the continent to ply their trade . the uk music industry has been an enormous success story over many decades and we need to support all of it — not just the multimillion selling acts , but the ones playing to a couple of hundred people , who will hopefully be tomorrow ’s multimillion selling acts . during my campaign , i was struck by the sheer number of constituents whose no . 1 priority for an incoming government was either the climate or nature , so i feel empowered to say that as influencers and makers of law , we have a duty to think not just in the short term and until the next election , but about those who have not even been born yet , and to leave behind a habitable planet . i was particularly proud to campaign under a banner of public service — service to our constituents and the nation . country first , party second . we are here not for the status , but for the people who elected us . i will try to keep reminding myself of that . we must deliver on our commitments , but we must also treat the staff here , the staff working in our offices , our colleagues in local government and in the civil service and our constituents with the respect that they deserve . if we can do that , we will move this great bastion of democracy a little closer to the people it serves . the secretary of state was asked — what recent progress he has made on meeting his target to have a zero carbon electricity system by 2030 . what recent progress he has made on meeting his target to have a zero carbon electricity system by 2030 . in 12 weeks , this government have hit the ground running for our 2030 target by ending the onshore wind ban in place for nine years under the conservative party , consenting to more nationally significant solar projects than in 14 years of the last government , and overseeing the most successful renewables auction in history compared with the conservatives ’ disastrous auction round that crashed offshore wind . this is a government in a hurry to meet our mandate from the british people , and we are just getting started . i thank the secretary of state for his really rapid action to reach our 100 % sustainable goals by 2030 . it has developed a real excitement in this country , and the people i speak to are genuinely behind this action . in stroud , we are developing a community energy programme of putting solar panels on every school and public building that agrees to it . what steps is he taking to support solar on schools and public buildings , and can he ensure there are no barriers to progress ? my hon . friend is absolutely right about the importance of both rooftop solar and ground - mounted solar . i can tell him that , as part of great british energy ’s plans , we want to work with local schools , local hospitals and , indeed , local leaders to have a solar panels programme , because this is a way to rapidly decarbonise and to save money off bills . i thank the secretary of state for that answer . cantonian high school in my constituency of cardiff west will be the first cardiff school to be operationally net zero in line with welsh government standards , while the building work itself will feature a significant reduction in embodied carbon . fairwater community campus will be a collection of highly energy - efficient buildings that are powered from renewable energy sources , helping cardiff to deliver on its one planet strategy , which outlines the city ’s ambition to mitigate climate change . will the secretary of state join me in celebrating the development , and agree with me that this sort of collaborative vision is required to deliver on our net zero commitments both here and in wales ? order . just to help everybody , the hon . gentleman is meant to go through the chair , but he was looking at the secretary of state . as good looking as the secretary of state is , it is easier if the hon . gentleman speaks to me , and then i can pick up what he says . thank you very much , mr speaker — and you , too , if i may say so . [ laughter . ] i congratulate my hon . friend , but particularly the fairwater community campus on the work it is doing . i think he highlights a very important issue . by helping to decarbonise public buildings , including schools , we help not only to cut our carbon emissions , but , crucially , to save money for those schools that they can then use for frontline services . the previous secretary of state commissioned the department to produce a full economic costing for getting to a fully decarbonised renewables - based grid by 2030 , as the secretary of state wants . that is obviously the sort of information that should be placed before the house so that we can have an informed discussion . it may be a good thing to do , but we should obviously know what the cost is . when will the secretary of state publish that information ? of course , that work is ongoing — in fact , i think the right hon . lady the shadow secretary of state has written me a letter about it — and we will be announcing our plans in due course . in my constituency , two major offshore wind farms are currently being developed : morgan and morecambe . i recently met nearly 100 farmers who will be directly affected by the cabling corridor and the substation plans for the cabling route to connect to penwortham . i am working with the hon . gentleman — and he knows this — will obviously want to stand up for what he sees as the best benefits for his constituency . i will be cautious about what i say , because there are proper procedures for planning decisions , including my quasi - judicial role . i will make this general point to the house , because i think this may well be a recurring theme during questions , but if we want to get off the dangerous exposure to international fossil fuel markets , which we were left with by the last government , we need to build the grid . every solar panel we put up , every wind turbine we put up and every piece of grid we build will help to deliver energy security for the british people . i call the shadow minister . not only is the secretary of state a very good looking fellow , but we in this house all know that he is an incredibly hard - working and very open minister , as indeed are his whole team . so i know that the reason he has not replied to my letter of let me tell the hon . gentleman a little about the situation that we inherited from the last government , because it is very relevant — obviously , he was not a minister in that last government . we inherited a situation where there was no plan : no plan for their target of 95 % clean power by 2030 , no plan for their target of clean power by 2035 , and no plan to avoid a repeat of the worst cost of living crisis in generations . this government are developing a plan and will publish it in due course . what steps he is taking with his international counterparts to tackle climate change . what steps he is taking with his international counterparts to tackle climate change . what steps he is taking with his international counterparts to tackle climate change . this government believe that we can only ensure climate security for further generations in the uk if we lead globally . that was the message of the prime minister at the united nations general assembly with our world - leading 2030 clean power plan , no new oil and gas licences , and playing our part in reforming the global financial system . next month i will be attending the cop29 talks in azerbaijan to stand up for britain ’s interests . it is brilliant to see the secretary of state commit to putting climate diplomacy back at the heart of cabinet , and i know he will bring a great amount of experience to that role . sir david attenborough has repeatedly warned that our planet hangs in the balance , so will my right hon . friend explain to the house what he will do to ensure that britain is once again a main player on the world stage in tackling the climate emergency ? will he meet me and representatives from my constituency of paisley and renfrewshire south to discuss the work that they are doing on rewilding , in an effort to play their part in tackling the climate emergency ? it sounds like my hon . friend ’s constituents are doing important work . she is absolutely right . the last government used to say that we have only 1 % of global emissions , as if that was a sort of excuse for inaction on the world stage . we see it differently . we see that only by leading at home can we provide the platform to lead internationally . this government have in a few short months put britian back on the world stage on climate , and we will be working with our best endeavours to ensure that we tackle the situation we have inherited — i am afraid the world is miles off track for keeping global warming to 1.5 ° . i call chris vince . thank you mr speaker — i’ve done the training . i welcome the secretary of state ’s warm words about our leadership on international climate issues , which is in stark contrast to the previous government ’s failings . i also publicly welcome his recent visit to harlow college — less said about the racing game , which he won , the better . does he agree that it is only thanks to the commitment shown by the new government to drastically deliver on climate change issues that we can lead on a world stage ? neatly done , although it was a little long . come on secretary of state . my hon . friend did very well , and i agree with him . part of the problem with the last government — i do not doubt that there were people making good endeavours — is that when we do something different at home to what we preach internationally , such as say we are going to power past coal by opening a new coalmine , people say , “ well , you are saying one thing and doing another . ” consistency is the absolute foundation for global leadership . i welcome the secretary of state ’s commitment to our international obligations , whether that is clean power lines or our own strong domestic climate policies that will help areas such as rochdale , with billpayers in recent years facing the grim possibility of high bills . this will make a huge difference , and the obvious comparison with the previous government is there for everyone to see . will he outline to the house what further steps he is taking on the global stage at both cop29 and cop30 to increase our global reach on climate ? i will say one thing in particular to my hon . friend . the prime minister said at the united nations general assembly that we will be unveiling our nationally determined contribution — our target for 2035 — at cop29 . we are doing that because the danger is that the world settles into a low - ambition equilibrium when it comes to tackling these issues . by having a 1.5º aligned target , we hope to set a good benchmark and a good example for the world . the climate change committee has said that there should be no more than a 25 % increase in airport capacity , compared with 2018 levels , if we are to achieve net zero by 2050 , yet current planned and recently approved airport expansions will allow for a 50 % to 70 % increase in demand . can the secretary of state explain why ministers in the department for transport are considering giving a green light to a third runway at heathrow ? how on earth will that allow the country to meet its net zero targets ? the beauty of carbon budgets and the system that was introduced when i was last in government — to be fair , it was carried on by the previous government of the past 14 years — is that they do at least in theory constrain what the government do . it is very important that we take carbon budgets seriously in our plans . the plans we inherited from the last government were way off track for meeting our carbon budgets , which is what this government will do . i very much welcome the secretary of state to his place . climate change is real ; it is not a myth . the quicker that everyone understands that , the better . can i pose a question to the secretary of state on rewilding ? there are some suggestions among experts that rewilding by planting trees on moor and heather might not be the most constructive way of utilising rewilding . has he had an opportunity to look at the issue of rewilding on moors and heather , which i understand that many experts think is detrimental ? i take the hon . gentleman seriously on these issues , and i undertake to write to him or to have one of the ministers write to him . i make the general point that rewilding and nature - based solutions are an essential part of tackling the climate crisis . international trade deals are a great way of using our leverage to make sure we advance our agenda on things such as tackling climate change . the previous government let britain down massively , conducting trade deals that let us down on farming , on food production and especially on climate change . will the secretary of state ensure that this government use the creation of new trade deals to advance our agenda on tackling climate change ? yes , and that is something i am already discussing with my right hon . friend the business secretary . i call the shadow minister . may i congratulate the secretary of state on his appointment of rachel kyte as his climate envoy to support his work with international partners ? before her appointment , did the secretary of state declare to officials her links with quadrature capital , which donated £ 4 million to the labour party ? also , did he declare her links to the green initiative foundation , which gave him £ 99,000 ? a yes or no answer will suffice . all the proper processes were followed by the foreign office , which was in charge of the appointment . i have to say that this is a very sad reflection on the conservative party . rachel kyte is an esteemed person who is recognised for her leadership , and all the conservatives can do is fling around baseless allegations . what steps he is taking to help increase levels of onshore wind energy production . after nine years of the disastrous , bill - raising ban on onshore wind in england , this government overturned the ban in our first 72 hours in office . we have also set up the onshore wind taskforce to restore the pipeline of projects destroyed by the last government . in the recent renewables auction , almost 1 gw of onshore wind was secured at prices that make it among the lowest - cost power sources to build and operate . when will the secretary of state bring forward proposals for community benefit for those living alongside wind and solar farms to greater incentivise the permitting of wind and solar farms , including ham solar farm in my constituency ? will that include a minimum level of compensation for the communities affected ? i am sympathetic to what the hon . gentleman says . we are working on proposals on community benefit . i believe that when communities host clean energy infrastructure , they should automatically get benefit from it . i am also sympathetic to what he said about minimum levels of support . we are discussing that with industry at the moment and will come forward with proposals soon . what steps he is taking to improve energy security . the energy shocks of recent years have laid bare the exposure of our energy system to the international fossil fuel market . that is why we have started a mission to reach clean power by 2030 , to end that reliance and ensure that the british people never again go through the sort of cost of living crisis that they have faced in recent years under the conservatives . people across hendon have paid the price for the previous government ’s failure over the last 14 years to invest in our energy system . does the minister agree that the only way to get us off the rollercoaster of high bills is to invest at pace and scale , as the government are doing through our clean energy mission ? i completely agree . the only way to permanently protect hard - working families and businesses from the high energy bills from which many are still suffering is to get ourselves off our reliance on the volatile fossil fuel markets . that is why we are rolling out at pace and at scale the clean power necessary to do so , which not only gives us energy security but creates good jobs , brings down bills and helps us to tackle the climate crisis . the secretary of state will be aware that 25 % of the uk is situated on top of coalmines , which can provide geothermal energy to heat houses and businesses in places like ashfield . will the minister meet me to discuss how we can make that work in coalfield communities ? i very much welcome the hon . gentleman ’s question — which i must say is somewhat of a surprise . i will absolutely meet him to discuss that . we have been clear that any technologies can be part of the solution and , if that can be part of the picture , i will meet him to discuss the options and the technology more generally . one of the ways in which we can increase energy security is through community - owned and co - operative energy schemes . they give greater control to local people , who get a say in where profits go , and crucially they build resilience from international energy markets . will the minister say a bit more about where community - owned energy will fit into the energy security plan ? i thank my hon . friend for that incredibly important question . community energy has so many benefits in our energy mix , including giving communities a stake in our energy future . we also know that there are many social and economic benefits that come from that . we are committed to our local power plan , which will deliver investment in community - owned projects . great british energy will have a key role to play in supporting communities , capacity building and in that initial funding to help them deliver these projects . could i invite the minister to meet a cross - party group of mps from the east of england to discuss how the review conducted by the electricity system operator can contribute to energy security and in particular to look at how undergrounding high voltage direct current cables could be cheaper in the long term than pylons and more efficient for achieving net zero ? will he agree at least to have a meeting with us on that basis ? i am always happy to have meetings with any right hon . and hon . members across the house on a range of issues , so i will take that away . the evidence suggests that undergrounding is five to 10 times more expensive and that actually it can have more of a damaging impact on nature and natural habitats than pylons . the important thing with all of this is that this is nationally important structure , which is necessary for us to get to the targets that we want to get to . i know that the hon . gentleman takes that seriously , and i will meet him and others , but we have been clear as a government that we will build this infrastructure if it is necessary . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of great british energy on job creation in industrial communities . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of great british energy on job creation in industrial communities . the government have two key missions : to become an energy superpower , and to grow the economy . great british energy will help us deliver on both those missions . the under - secretary of state for energy security and net zero , my hon . friend i welcome the minister ’s response and last week ’s fantastic announcement about track 1 carbon capture investment in teesside . teesside has extraordinary potential for green jobs , whether in sustainable aviation fuel with alfanar or in carbon capture , hydrogen and so much else . does the minister agree that only with labour ’s plan for clean power by 2030 , great british energy and our national wealth fund can we create well - paid long - term jobs in the industries of the future ? i agree with my hon . friend , and i thank him for his support . i doubt anybody would disagree with him on the benefits of our announcements on carbon capture and storage , which will create 4,000 jobs in the short term , with carbon capture more broadly creating up to 50,000 jobs over the next decade or so . [ interruption . ] the opposition front benchers chuckle , but i wonder whether , instead of dismissing that number of jobs , they might welcome them alongside government members . alongside carbon capture , great british energy , our national wealth fund and our british jobs bonus , we are putting in place the levers to encourage growth across our country , and the climate change committee estimates that up to 725,000 net new jobs could be created in low - carbon sectors by 2030 . does the minister agree that gb energy is a fantastic opportunity for wolverhampton north east to capitalise on the opportunities for research and start - ups on our forthcoming green innovation corridor and to put wolverhampton north east back where we belong : at the heart of industrial growth and british industry ? i agree with my hon . friend : it is a fantastic opportunity . publicly owned great british energy will partner with industry to help us to deliver our mission of clean power by 2030 . i have been reading about the green innovation corridor , and i am interested to see what it will deliver . working in partnership with the private sector , we can rebuild jobs across the west midlands and far beyond . does the minister agree with the head of the gmb union that the government ’s plans to ban new licences for oil and gas will result in exporting jobs and importing virtue ? i agree with the gmb in its warm congratulations for our announcements yesterday to deliver carbon capture and storage across the country . we are of course working closely with our trade union colleagues . it is interesting : in opposition , the conservatives suddenly quote the unions , when they refused to even meet them in government . we work very closely with the gmb and all our trade unions to ensure that we have a just energy transition and that we are creating the jobs and skills of the future by becoming a clean energy superpower . what recent assessment he has made of the potential merits of introducing energy social tariffs . we know that people are worried about their energy bills going into the winter and that , for a growing number of people , energy is simply unaffordable . we are absolutely determined to take this affordability issue and tackle it head on . there are many different ideas about what a social tariff could look like , and it means different things to different people . we are clear that we will tackle the affordability question and look at the full range of options available to us . but our priority — my priority — this winter is to ensure that families struggling with bills have support through our warm home discount scheme , and to work with energy suppliers to provide support . i am grateful to my hon . friend for her response . i absolutely recognise that energy prices over the last few years have escalated , putting particular pressure on households with low incomes and also those with high energy needs , such as disabled people and pensioners . i agree that the warm home discount scheme is valuable , but it is limited and i am concerned for people with high energy needs but on low incomes , who might fall foul of the system as it stands . we have been working flat out with energy suppliers to ensure that they are providing additional support to families who will struggle with bills this winter . in august , i met all the suppliers , and there was a shared commitment to do everything we can to support vulnerable households . we have been working with them , the industry body , ofgem and citizens advice to ensure that there is a proper package of support in place this winter so that we can support families who we know are struggling with their bills . would it not have been better to put that proper package of support in place before the government withdrew the winter fuel allowance from so many pensioners ? we are having to clean up the mess that the opposition left us . yes , we have means - tested the winter fuel payment , but we have also been clear that we will do everything we can do to support vulnerable households . that is why we have extended the take - up of pension credit and the household support fund , and we are working flat out with energy suppliers to provide additional support to all vulnerable households this winter . i thank the minister for her work . warm home prescriptions can target that support towards elderly people and those with underlying health conditions , saving our nhs as well as keeping people warm over the winter . the pilot has shown real benefit . will she meet me to discuss that and other options to keep old people warm this winter ? we want to work with anyone who will help us reach vulnerable households . i am very happy to meet my hon . friend to look at the full range of options available . ofgem ’s review of standing charges options paper closed for submissions on we as a government are committed to getting down standing charges . ofgem has consulted and will report back in due course . what steps he is taking to introduce his warm homes plan . what steps he is taking to introduce his warm homes plan . what steps he is taking to introduce his warm homes plan . we are running to deliver our warm homes plan , which will upgrade homes across the country to make them warmer and cheaper to run . we will set out the full plan in the spring , but at the heart of it will be an offer of grants and low - interest loans to support families to invest in insulation , low - carbon heating and home improvements . critically , alongside that , we are committing to boosting minimum energy efficiency standards for private rented homes and social housing , to tackle fuel poverty . i thank the minister for her answer and for her commitment to the warm homes plan . i congratulate her on the announcement over the conference recess to end the scandal of cold , draughty homes in the rental sector , which particularly affects people in my constituency in towns such as haltwhistle , throckley , newburn , hexham and elsewhere . does she agree that often the very poorest in our communities are forced to live in those cold and draughty properties , and it is important that we cut bills and give those families energy security ? i agree . one in four households in the private rented sector is in fuel poverty . we need to bear down on bills . our commitment to improve and boost minimum energy efficiency standards will lift 1 million renters out of fuel poverty . we are determined to do this alongside our bigger package to deliver clean power by 2030 , which will drive down bills for everyone . people across my constituency are worried about how they will afford to heat their homes this winter . i was shocked to hear the former energy minister , now shadow minister , admit that his government should have gone “ further and faster ” on insulating homes , which will certainly help . does the minister agree that this is an admission of failure by the previous conservative government , who have left working people to pay the price ? can she reassure my constituents that this government will do better ? i completely agree . the legacy left to us by the last government was woeful . ordinary people — families across the country — have paid the price of that legacy . we are clear that we will do and must do better . our warm homes plan will kickstart the upgrades that we need across the country so that we can deliver warmer homes that are cleaner to heat . millions of cold , draughty homes need updating uk - wide , so it is great to hear that there will be a proper plan , rather than the itty - bitty approach of spraying bits of money here and there . in the plan , will the minister look at the fact that there is no national retrofit advice service in the uk ? can the government rectify that ? they could take a leaf out of sadiq khan ’s book , because his service in london has helped 24,000 households . i agree with my hon . friend . there is a critical role for national advice to ensure that people can access support and know the range of interventions available to them . we will be looking at that as we look at our warm homes plan . we are very clear that it will be a comprehensive plan that will deliver the upgrades we need to see across the country . one of my low - income pensioner constituents had a solar panel installed on their home through a government scheme . however , they are now facing an issue with birds nesting in it , which is causing a huge amount of problems because the scheme does not come with protection . will the minister agree to meet me about this constituency issue , because it is really affecting one of my older constituents who , sadly , has also just lost her winter fuel payment ? yes , i will agree to meet to discuss the range of things we can do . i very much hope the secretary of state and his ministers agree that if we are serious about energy security and net zero , we must be serious about energy efficiency . what steps are they taking , in addition to working on insulating existing homes , to ensure that the promised 1.5 million new homes are built to net zero standards , have solar panels on the roof , and are fully insulated so that every new home is a warm home ? we have an ambitious plan to build more homes . we want those homes to be fit for the future . we will put out information in due course on the standards we want across those homes , but we have an opportunity to do insulation , energy efficiency and homes that are fit for the future , at the same time as building the homes we need . local authorities play an important role as trusted sources of knowledge and expertise , and guide householders , for example , to trusted installers , but they need the resources to do that . will the department devolve some resources to local authorities to fulfil that important role ? we see local and regional government playing an absolutely fundamental role to reach homes that we need to upgrade , but also to help us deliver the scale of ambition we want . local and regional government will be a key part of our warm homes plan . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . keeping vulnerable people warm and lowering their energy bills is , i am sure , something we can all agree on across the house . insulating homes is a key part of that puzzle . we welcome the news that we will see the warm homes plan in spring . however , does the minister agree that ahead of this winter we need an emergency home insulation plan , particularly for the vulnerable , along with allocated funding ? does she have any idea of the amount and allocation of funding in this parliament that there will be for insulating homes ? we are really clear that as we develop our plans we absolutely need to get on with the job of upgrading homes . we have announced our warm homes local grant and our warm homes social housing fund , which are targeted at low - income families , because we know there is a job of work to do . we are committed to an additional £ 6.6 billion to invest in our warm homes plan over the course of this parliament . what steps he is taking to ensure a just transition for workers in high - carbon sectors . we are committed to accelerating the just transition for workers in britain to boost our energy security and ensure good , long - term jobs , especially in north sea communities . we will work with them and other industrial regions to develop a plan , ensuring those workers are the people who decarbonise our country . i thank the minister for her response . unfortunately , the unjust transitions we are seeing in grangemouth and port talbot are a damning indictment of the lack of a proactive approach to a just transition over the last few years . tomorrow at the treasury , over 50 major unions and climate groups will be calling for a new approach to the energy transition where , instead of just de - risking private profit , there is a governmental ringfenced funding package for north sea oil and gas workers , including help with skills and job creation . will the secretary of state or ministers please meet the chancellor of the exchequer to ensure that those ringfenced funds are secure , so that we can stop betting on the industry to do the right thing ? last week was the historic week when 142 years of coal - fired electricity generation came to an end , and this week we have announced the new era of carbon capture and storage . we will work in a different way from the last government , adopting a proactive approach to ensure that the transition works for people and that we create new jobs as well . at grangemouth we provided a package of support for workers , and at port talbot we managed to negotiate a better deal than the last government . we will use all the levers that we have — great british energy , the national wealth fund , the british jobs bonus and the office of green energy jobs that we have set up — to ensure that we get the transition right . the secretary of state and the minister will know that civil nuclear has a higher employment multiplier than any other form of zero or low - carbon energy generation . as part of the transition from high - carbon sectors , what specific measures are the government taking to retrain workers and transfer skills into the nuclear energy industry , thus ensuring that they benefit from job creation in this growing sector in my constituency and throughout the country ? obviously the last government did nothing about nuclear in 14 years , apart from coming up with a plan . we will ensure that nuclear is an important part of our country ’s future , and we will be working to provide the right skills and jobs in the right places to deliver that . what steps he is taking to increase grid capacity we are halving the development time for new transmission infrastructure through reforms of planning , supply chains and other areas , delivering the grid capacity that is needed to achieve clean power by 2030 and meet a doubling of electricity demand by 2050 . communities are doing their very best , and lots of people are trying to help each community to power itself . my own village has its community solar project , which was fully funded by local residents . there are non - profit organisations which have dealt with local schemes by putting solar panels on schools with an element of community ownership , and there are individuals who try but are faced with extortionate costs for connection to the grid . the grid was really designed for big old power stations rather than smaller power creators trying to plonk power into the system . what can the minister do to encourage national grid to pivot , and help communities and individuals to create their energy nearer to their homes ? the hon . lady is right to draw attention to the importance of community energy projects throughout the country . we want to see many more of them , but we have inherited a grid that needs significant upgrading , and we are now working apace to ensure that that happens . part of the work that i have been doing with national grid and others involves trying to identify the next steps that are needed to shorten the connections queue , and also to make it more affordable for smaller community projects to connect . there is an important role for partnership as well , with some of the bigger renewables projects giving part of their connections queues to smaller ones , and that is already happening in some parts of the country . there is no doubt that there is much more to do , but we are , as i have said , working apace to try to move this forward after 14 years of inaction . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . as we have heard from my hon . friend the hon . lady is right to highlight those issues . the connections queue , in particular , is a huge challenge , with more than 700 gw waiting to join it . the last government did some work to establish how the queue could be prioritised , and we will now implement that , but we need to go further . it is clear that by 2030 we will need to build four times as much new transmission network as has been built since 1990 . this is a project to rewire the entire country , to improve the current connections availability , and to work with everyone , including the new national energy systems operator , on the road map towards 2030 . what steps his department is taking to increase clean electricity generation . the latest contracts for difference round secured a record 131 renewable electricity projects across great britain . this will deliver a total capacity of 9.6 gw , enough to power the equivalent of 11 million homes . the energy secretary will continue to work with industry to explore how the contracts for difference scheme , and other energy policies , can be expanded even further . i commend the secretary of state for his excellent work since he took office in accelerating clean electricity generation in the uk , and i commend the fantastic team he has with him . the minister is right to say that there is a clean energy imperative if we are to tackle the climate crisis , boost our energy security and reduce our bills . what steps has the minister taken to ensure that this government encourage and take advantage of the significant opportunity around community energy , and will he meet me and representatives from my constituency of sheffield central to discuss how we can boost the growth of community energy ? i thank my hon . friend for her question . she is absolutely right to say that , in order for us to meet our 2030 ambitions , we will need a whole range of different options . community energy is a critical part of that , helping to deliver energy security and lower bills . crucially , it also gives communities a stake in the energy future . that is why one of great british energy ’s five objectives is to support the delivery of a local power plan , which puts local communities , combined authorities , local authorities and others in the driving seat in restructuring our energy economy . i am happy to meet my hon . friend and others to discuss this issue further . contrary to what one of the ministers said earlier , the last government brought about one of the largest revivals in nuclear energy in 70 years in order to provide clean electricity generation , yet we hear precious little from the new government on their plans for nuclear ; we hear only their plans for inefficient technology that will destroy the countryside . why are they so anti - nuclear , and when are they going to get on with delivering nuclear energy ? i will give credit to the conservative government on one thing : they were very good at making grand announcements . on delivery , however , they were much poorer . looking at a whole range of things — carbon capture being a very good example — they had lots of warm words but no delivery whatsoever . on nuclear , they had lots of warm words but no delivery whatsoever . in 14 years , how many nuclear power stations were built under the conservative party ? none . we will get on with doing the work . if we want to see an increase in clean energy generation , we need more announcements such as the one we saw last week on the development of carbon capture , usage and storage . although that is incredibly welcome and a sign of determined action from the new government , there is still more to be done . perhaps the minister can give an indication of when he anticipates he will be able to announce progress on track 1 extension , and share some information on track 2 , because that would secure thousands of jobs in the humber region . my hon . friend is absolutely right to say that in the three and a bit months that we have been in government we have moved at pace to deliver the largest renewables auction in history and to make last week ’s announcement on carbon capture . we are working through the next stages of the process at pace , and we will have further announcements in the weeks ahead . does the minister agree that it would be better to have the right electricity system in 2032 or 2035 than to have the wrong one because of an artificial target , which may be undeliverable by 2030 ? i could be wrong , but i think the right hon . gentleman previously said that his own government ’s plans on onshore wind in england were not the right approach to take . i agree with him , which is why we lifted the onshore wind ban . the reality is that whereas the previous government used to talk the talk on climate action , we are the ones now delivering — and delivering an energy system fit for the future . i call the shadow minister . one way to increase clean electricity generation in the united kingdom would be to invest at pace in new nuclear . we left government with a clear plan to get to 24 gw of nuclear power by 2050 . does that target remain ? this is the whole point about the conservative government , and it is why we have inherited such an economic mess : they made a series of announcements , with absolutely no funding to back them up . as you would expect , mr speaker , i pay close attention to the conservative party conferences , and the hon . gentleman made a very astute point , which i am happy to repeat for the benefit of hansard and the house : “ after 14 years of conservative government , we are now in a position where it ’s more difficult to build critical infrastructure than it was when we came into power ” . i could not have put it better myself . our record on nuclear speaks for itself . we launched the small modular down - selection process and great british nuclear , and invested £ 200 million in new advanced nuclear fuels . we consulted on a new route to market for advanced modular reactors and new technologies , and granted a development consent order for sizewell c. there is concern that there is a go - slow in the government right now , so when can we expect a final investment decision on sizewell c ? will it still be this year ? i was not aware when my right hon . friend the secretary of state changed the titles of the ministerial portfolios that we had moved away from having a minister for consultation , but it seems that all the hon . gentleman was doing in his time in office was launching consultations . we are going to get on with delivering and we are moving at pace on the whole of the electricity system , including on nuclear , and delivering on the things that he failed to do . if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . as well as our measures on onshore wind , solar and renewables , this government have begun legislating for great british energy and setting out our plan for proper standards for private and social renters to take 1 million families out of fuel poverty , and on friday we announced deals to kick - start britain ’s carbon capture industry . all of this will deliver our mission to make britain a clean energy superpower . it is right for bills , right for energy security , right for jobs and right for climate leadership . i welcome the actions outlined by my right hon . friend , particularly the recent announcement that gb energy will be headquartered in aberdeen , with satellite offices in edinburgh and glasgow . can he outline the role that he expects the satellite offices to take ? given the investment already under way in the port of leith for a number of renewable companies , as well as the prospects for the supply chain and manufacturing , will he consider leith as the location for the edinburgh site ? my hon . friend is absolutely right to draw attention to our announcement on aberdeen as the headquarters of great british energy and the important role that it will play , and also to the importance of the satellite offices . i know from my visit to her constituency of the huge potential of her area on these issues , and we want to drive jobs throughout the supply chain through great british energy . i call the shadow secretary of state . the secretary of state promised in the general election to cut everyone ’s bills by £ 300 by 2030 — a pledge he will not repeat now that he is in office . in fact , one of his first acts has been to snatch the same amount away from millions of pensioners in poverty . the right hon . gentleman likes to preach , to politicise and , dare i say it , to patronise , but i have one simple question for him . to the millions of pensioners who are worried about their heating bills this christmas , will he apologise ? the people who should be apologising are the last government , who left this country in a total mess — a £ 22 billion black hole . i have to say to the right hon . lady that she does have a brass neck . she said of “ i have people in my constituency telling me that they do n’t need the winter fuel payments … why do we not have a … mechanism for means - testing ? ” that is her position . there we have it : no apology ; no recognition that it is the right hon . gentleman ’s government ’s decisions that are going to leave pensioners in the cold this winter . he has to acknowledge this : from the trade unions to the cbi , from blue labour to blairites and from the left to the right of his party , people are sounding the alarm that his ideological approach will see jobs lost and bills go through the roof . even his old pal ed balls does not think that gb energy is going to deliver the green transition , and i read this morning that the prime minister ’s brand - new chief of staff is a sceptic of the secretary of state ’s approach . the secretary of state is increasingly isolated in his party , so when will he do the decent thing and set out the full systems cost of his approach , so that the british public can see what he is going to do to their bills ? oh dear , oh dear . the truth is that after three months of this government , people have breathed a sigh of relief that there is finally a government with a plan for the country . [ interruption . ] i think the right hon . lady should listen to what her own ministerial team has been saying about her . the former networks minister has said that their infrastructure approach is hopeless . the former energy minister says that the onshore wind ban was “ always mad ” , and lord callanan said that the right hon . lady had kicked the solar consents “ into the long grass ” . if i were her , i would be hoping for just one thing from the next tory leader : a shadow cabinet reshuffle . grid capacity and the slow speed of new connections is a major issue in west london . it is holding back house building , and it is holding back businesses exciting new green businesses such as allye energy in my constituency . the conservatives did absolutely nothing in 14 years to tackle the issue . what is my right hon . friend ’s strategy , and will he meet me and local businesses to discuss how we can tackle this issue together and meet our missions around growth and good clean energy ? my hon . friend is absolutely right to say that that issue is holding back projects across the country , which is why we have tackled it from day one . we are attempting to release network capacity , which can then be reallocated to accelerate the connection of viable projects . there is a lot of work to do , and we are building on what the previous government did to prioritise the queue and to build the necessary infrastructure that should have been built over the past 14 years . does the secretary of state accept that the only way we will both meet our net zero targets and keep energy bills down is by pressing ahead with a new generation of nuclear power stations ? will he therefore accelerate existing projects such as hinkley point and sizewell c , and press ahead with small modular reactor and advanced modular reactor technology ? i agree with the right hon . gentleman . nuclear is an essential part of the energy mix . we are mainly going to have a renewable system , but nuclear is an essential accompaniment . i fully support all the projects he mentions . the previous minister of state for energy security and net zero has admitted that the last government could have gone further and faster on insulating homes , but said that he would wait to see how the new government tackle the issue . when it comes to insulating millions more homes across the country and reducing bills for millions of families , will we simply take a “ wait and see ” approach ? whether it is our ending of the onshore wind ban , the ccus funding we announced last week , our plans for great british energy or our warm homes plan , we are hitting the ground running to deliver our clean power mission . the conservatives spent 14 years dithering and delaying , leaving ordinary people to pay the price , but we will get on with the job of delivering energy security so that we can secure financial security for families , good jobs and climate action . to achieve net zero , we will need widespread micro - generation alongside large - scale projects . however , as a local farmer who wanted to install an anaerobic digester told me , grid connections are both costly and subject to long delays . what does the secretary of state plan to do to address these issues , particularly in rural areas such as my thornbury and yate constituency ? the hon . lady raises a question about the problems of grid connection that is familiar to many members . we are building on work done by nick winser , the former electricity networks commissioner , and we want to go further to tackle the problem of grid connections once and for all . the great turbines of the rampion wind farm are off my beautiful coastal constituency . although the uk has done well on offshore generation , the jobs in this sector have not always been here in the uk . what plans do the government have to expand offshore wind , and to ensure that uk workers and supply chains benefit from that expansion ? my hon . friend asks an important question . of course , we and the opposition have fundamentally different views . we believe in an industrial strategy that will help to deliver our supply chains . we believe in great british energy , and we believe in a sovereign wealth fund , which so many other countries have and the previous government failed to deliver . we will make sure we have resilient supply chains that create jobs , deliver energy security and maximise the economic benefits of the transition . what guarantees can the secretary of state give to steelworkers in scunthorpe that the grid connection required for a new electric arc furnace will be ready on time next year ? the hon . gentleman raises a very important issue that i am afraid was not solved by the last government . we are working at pace with national grid , and i am sure the under - secretary of state for energy security and net zero , my hon . friend i welcome the government ’s commitment to increasing renewable energy generation . an important component of that is the development of associated infrastructure , including battery storage facilities such as those proposed in cullingworth in my constituency . how do the government plan to ensure that the safety of residents is not put at risk by such developments , and that there is clear community benefit from any renewable energy plans and the associated infrastructure ? batteries will play an important part in the short - duration storage required for the energy system we are building for the future . it is a question of balance . communities will be engaged in the consultation process , and i will be convening a roundtable with providers of battery technology and other short - duration storage in the next few months to learn both from projects that have worked well and from projects on which we could do better in future . i will happily share any information from that with my hon . friend . will the secretary of state commit to ensuring that large energy suppliers work with community energy organisations to generate and sell electricity locally at discounted rates , and provide fair community benefits , as proposed by the liberal democrats ? the hon . lady raises the important issue that , as a country , we are massively underpowered on community energy . as part of the gb energy local power plan we will be trying to change that , learning from countries such as germany and denmark , which do much better than us . we will certainly look at the issues she raises . the clean power by 2030 mission shows the clear intention of this government to get on with the just transition . energy workers in falkirk , grangemouth and across the central belt are rightly concerned about jobs . between 2013 and 2023 , under the previous government , jobs in the uk oil and gas sector halved . unfortunately , some of the opposition parties have opposed the stream of funding for clean infrastructure and jobs of the future that will come from an increase in the energy profits levy on the record profits of oil and gas giants . does the secretary of state agree that it is time opposition parties started putting their own plans forward on how they would get on with the just transition and deliver clean energy jobs at a critical time for workers and the climate ? my hon . friend raises the important issue that what will define the future for north sea workers is whether there is a plan for future jobs in offshore wind , carbon capture and hydrogen . there was no plan from the previous government ; this government are absolutely determined to ensure a just transition for those workers , using the power of government and a proper industrial policy to make it happen . on petrol prices , for the past 11 years the government froze fuel duty ; they cut it in 2002 and then froze it again . the government instructed the competition and markets authority to carry out a review , and we came up with the pumpwatch scheme . a consultation was undertaken in january , but when i wrote to the government in september to ask about its results , they said they were looking at it and would consider it in due course . is the scheme a priority for the government ? if not , in what other ways will they ensure petrol prices are kept low at the pump ? are they going to freeze fuel duty ? i will not comment on the budget , obviously . we are very sympathetic to pumpwatch — it is important that there is a fair deal for consumers at the pump . exeter city council has worked hard to install solar panels on council homes to ensure that social tenants can benefit from lower bills and participate in the green transition . can the minister set out what more we can do to ensure that all tenants benefit from new green technologies ? my hon . friend raises such an important issue . across the house , we can have different views on ground - mounted solar , but we need to do more on rooftops and to ensure that tenants , for example council tenants , benefit from such technologies . that is a huge priority for us and we are working on it with colleagues in the ministry of housing , communities and local government . what discussions has the secretary of state had with the scottish government regarding the major planning application for an offshore wind farm between scotland and northern ireland , which may well have significant implications for the giant ’s causeway world heritage site ? the hon . gentleman will understand that i have to be careful in what i say about planning issues , but he should rest assured that i have frequent conversations with my counterpart in the scottish government and , no doubt , that is one issue we will be discussing . warwick and leamington must be one of the sunniest places in the united kingdom given the flurry of applications we have had for solar farms . there is a “ loss of amenity ” caused by one application , but if that community were prepared to welcome onshore wind turbines , of which we have none in warwickshire , rather than a solar farm , would the secretary of state or the minister agree to support that ? will they meet me to discuss the issue ? every planning application and development consent order is assessed on its merits . importantly , the secretary of state for environment , food and rural affairs , my right hon . friend the secretary of state and the under - secretary of state , i know from the questions that i have received from the opposition that the right hon . lady has been a tireless advocate on these issues . i do understand the concerns of local communities about clean energy infrastructure , which is why i am so keen on the idea of community benefit . it is important that communities receive benefit for hosting that infrastructure . we must have a discussion about this matter in the house and across the country . if we are to end our exposure to international fossil fuels and the kind of the cost of living crisis that we have seen over the past few years , which has devastated communities across britain , this infrastructure does need to be built . last week ’s announcement on carbon capture and hydrogen in my constituency demonstrates that we now have a government of substance , not of hollow slogans . what discussions have the secretary of state and ministers had with the trade unions to ensure that we build those facilities with unionised labour ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . after 14 years of failure and inaction , we now have a government who believe in working with our trade unions , who have the backing of our trade unions , and who want to work to create good jobs in the industries of the future . our announcement on carbon capture , which was groundbreaking and world beating , will deliver just that . the institution of civil engineers has called for a spatial energy plan to utilise new and emerging technologies to facilitate future net zero infrastructure planning . will the government look to bring forward a spatial energy plan and meet me to discuss that ? yes , we will be bringing forward a spatial energy plan . that is one of the responsibilities of the national energy system operator . the hon . gentleman makes an important point : we need a plan for the system . we can have a plan for the 2030 system done by the neso and , indeed , a wider strategic spatial energy plan , which will be crucial for the country . the warm homes plan is excellent and much needed in towns such as mine , but on warm homes grants for insulation , during recess i met a large number of constituents who had been victims of failed insulation and cowboy workmanship under such government schemes . some are living in horrific conditions with useless warranties . is the minister aware of their plight ? will she ensure that regulation is strong enough , and will she meet me and victims to make sure that this never happens again ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . we are aware of those cases of bad insulation and we are clear that we need to get a firmer grip on them . to persuade everyone that we should be insulating and upgrading all of our homes , we need the highest standard possible . i agree to meet him to discuss this matter further . in my constituency , a new solar farm at barkham is being delivered that will provide clean energy for more than 4,000 homes and provide a funding boost for wokingham borough council . it will be connected in 2026 , but there were concerns that connection to the grid could be delayed by 11 years . what steps will the minister take to reduce similar delays , and does he think that the government can meet their net zero targets if the new renewable energy infrastructure can not be quickly connected to the grid ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . a similar point has been raised by many hon . members across the house . this issue affects areas right across the country . we are doing what we can at the moment to prioritise the connections queue , so that the most important projects , or those most able to be delivered , can move forward . there is much more that we can do on that , but , fundamentally , we need to build much more network infrastructure in the first place so that we can speed up and reduce the cost of these connections for schemes such as the one he mentions . on a point of order , mr speaker . i am concerned that the government have not always been consistent with the explanations that they have given of their policy in relation to arms exports to israel . in particular , some of the explanations that ministers have given in this house are inconsistent with accounts that have been given elsewhere , including in the other place . my noble friend lord howard is also pursuing this matter in the other place . this is a critical foreign policy matter involving a close ally . mr speaker , have you had any indication that the foreign secretary intends to come to the house to make a statement on this matter and to clear up any misunderstanding that might have arisen as a result of discrepancies between what we have been told and what ministers have said elsewhere ? i am grateful to the right hon . member for giving notice of that point of order . as he well knows , the chair is not responsible for the accuracy of ministerial remarks , either in this house or elsewhere ; but i am sure that those on the treasury bench will have noted his comments , and i am sure they have been taken on board . i do not think we have heard the end of this yet , so i am sure , as i know the right hon . member well , that the opposition will not give up at this stage . i beg to move , that this house regrets that the government has decided to impose vat on independent school fees ; believes that educational provision should not be taxed ; regrets that the government is rushing to implement this change part - way through an academic year ; calls on the government to exempt from the vat charge fees paid in respect of children of military and diplomatic families , all children who have an education , health and care plan , or who are in the process of applying for one , all children on sen support , centres for advanced training and schools in the music and dance scheme , all children at schools whose fees are lower than the average per capita funding for a state school place , and children at religious schools of denominations for whom there is no faith school provision in the state sector ; further calls on the government to postpone imposition of the vat charge for schools in areas where state schools in the relevant key stage are already on average over 95 % full ; also calls on the government to postpone imposition of the vat charge for fees paid in respect of children who have started a public examination course , to september 2025 for pupils currently in year 11 or year 13 , and to september 2026 for pupils currently in year 10 or year 12 ; and calls on the government to publish a full impact assessment of the effects of this policy on independent schools and the state sector ahead of the budget . there are 85 days to go until the introduction of labour ’s education tax , and we are still in the dark . many questions remain for parents , for children and for schools — when i say “ schools ” , that is both independent schools and state schools — and also for the local authorities that are responsible for special educational needs provision and generally for ensuring that everyone can get a place at school . this is a huge change , which is being made in a headlong rush . there are big worries about children with special educational needs or a disability , about military families , about the talented musicians and dancers of tomorrow , about small religious faiths and about the widest impact of all — that on state schools , because this means disruption , bigger classes , budget overstretch , and ultimately , parents being less likely to get their preferred choice of school . even those who do not necessarily object to this in principle are saying it can not be pushed through this fast , from the chartered institute of taxation to the nasuwt . it is a long - standing principle that you do not put tax on learning — a principle all but universally observed around the world . on the conservative benches we believe in that principle and we believe in the sanctity of parental choice . the vast majority of children , of course , go to state - funded schools , and we defend the right of parents to choose those schools and defend the diversity of those schools . a small number of parents choose home schooling ; we defend that right too . and yes , some choose the independent sector . parents are the first educators of their children . the state sets an expectation of a suitable education for all children , and beyond that , parents should make the choice of what is best for their child . parents might decide to opt out of state education for any one , or many , of several reasons — quite often simply because they have found the school that they believe is right for their child , and where their child is most happy . rose — rose — i am spoilt for choice . i give way to my right hon . friend . during the election , in the monks walk pub , i met a constituent who has stayed in his small home and has one car for the family , because they decided their bullied daughter needed to go to another school . they have sacrificed , with the support of wider family , so that that child with special educational needs can go to a private school . it is children and families like that who will be the victims of this spiteful policy . does my right hon . friend agree ? my right hon . friend is right to identify that many parents make great personal financial sacrifices to do what they believe is best for their children . some parents whose children go to independent school are rich , and some are definitely not . i include in that latter bracket most of the parents sending their children , for example , to small religious schools in hackney , salford or birmingham . very many more are in the middle , including many professionals working in our public services . the shadow minister has rightly underlined the issue for those who send their children to faith schools or independent schools . many constituents in strangford have told me that they have saved and persevered , have not been on holidays , have not bought a second car , or have even continued to use their old car longer than they should , so that those moneys can go into their children ’s education . does he , like me , find it impossible to understand how it can be that it is the labour party — the party of conscience , i would say — that has let us down on this issue and is going to penalise people who are hard - pressed to find education for their children ? the hon . gentleman is right about the financial sacrifices some make . let us be clear : it is possible to tax wealthier people or people with a higher income more , but the government should be honest about it . the way to do so is through the income tax system , not through a choice that people make to have their child in an independent school . the hon . gentleman did not mention this , but i might add that because the situation in northern ireland is different from that in england — by the way , the situation in scotland is different , too — the government need to think carefully about how the policy is applied throughout the whole united kingdom , because vat is a reserved matter , and about what it means for the hon . gentleman ’s constituents and others across these islands . my late mother and dad used to run a pub , and they paid their taxes . it was a private business that made a profit . why should these businesses not pay their taxes ? why should they not pay what is owed ? this is a completely different situation . independent schools do pay tax . indicated dissent . no , independent schools do pay tax on supplies . no tax is charged on education , whether in an independent school or in other settings , and that is a very long - standing principle . let me clear up one very important definitional point , which i ask colleagues to reflect on . there is no tax break involved . it would be a tax break if a person who had a child at an independent school and was not taking a place at a state school were charged less tax as a result . that does not happen in the united kingdom . everybody contributes to state sector education , whether or not they take up a place . the principle of no tax on learning is a fast one , and once we loosen it , we do not know where we will go . where might the treasury look next ? private nurseries , perhaps ? music lessons ? private tutoring ? what is the philosophical difference between independent school education and private tutoring ? let me make a point to demonstrate how rushed and ill thought through this policy is . my understanding is that if a child in a nursery has turned five but the other children in the class have not , all the parents in that nursery year will have to pay vat on their child ’s nursery fees . that is how badly this has been thought through . my hon . friend is right . that comes from the rushed nature of the legislation . the sloppy drafting means that children who are not of school age get dragged into this tax if they happen to be in the same room as children who are , and there are concerns about what might follow in other borderline cases . the government claim that the policy is about revenue , not politics , but having read the secretary of state ’s twitterings , i think hon . members could be forgiven for mistaking the motivation . it is entirely spurious , for multiple reasons , to link this tax to 6,500 teachers , mental health support or anything else . the money will go into general exchequer receipts , and anyway , 6,500 teachers is not that many in the scheme of things , given the 468,000 there are now . that is a compound growth rate of 0.3 % over five years — and , by the way , a lot fewer teachers than we recruited in the last five years . mental health support teams are already being rolled out , and they cover primary schools as well as secondary schools . it is not clear what the difference is in the new government ’s policy on mental health support , other than that it will not include primary schools . to the extent that the vat revenue could be hypothecated , it looks a lot more like that revenue would reduce cuts to education resourcing , rather than increasing it . if the policy is about revenue , not politics , the government could easily commit to one simple thing today . they are confident , they tell us , that the policy will raise a large sum of money and not create large costs . will they commit to measuring and reporting back on that , and if it turns out , against expectations , that they were wrong , will they reverse it ? i thank my right hon . friend , who is giving an excellent introduction to the debate . is it his understanding that our military personnel , and those serving in our diplomatic service , will also be hit by this tax ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . as things stand , those who get the continuity of education allowance would be hit , in part , by the tax . in the calculus that my right hon . friend rightly asks the government to publish , can we include the foreign receipts that the independent sector generates ? the roll of a school in my constituency includes a very large number of children from overseas whose parents pay directly into the uk economy . that school is now under threat . the loss of that revenue will be substantial , and the local impact huge . may we have that factored in , given that , so far , we have not seen any figures on the loss of money and reputation that the closure of many such schools will entail ? my right hon . friend is correct : substantial export earnings come from the sector , and from a globally mobile set of families . but i would go further ; in addition to the direct export earnings effect , there is also an indirect effect . for companies deciding where to site their european headquarters , english education is a big factor . that is partly because of our brilliant state schools , which have improved so much over the past 14 years , but the availability of independent schools is also a factor . the shadow secretary of state makes a strong point about the sanctity of zero - rating vat for education . i am concerned that children ’s clothes , which are currently exempt from vat , may be the next target . notwithstanding the impact that the change to vat will have on individual families , does he agree that private and prep schools — my constituency has five — are enormous employers of people involved in building maintenance , such as electricians and plumbers , and that the impact on the wider economy could well be profound ? order . i remind members to look towards the chair when they are speaking , or what they say will not be picked up by the mics ; i then struggle to hear them . i know that the minister was struggling as well . if members keep the chatter down , it will help us both . my right hon . friend is of course correct about the economic contribution that schools make locally and the large numbers of people they employ . that point was also made by nasuwt , which is worried about teachers being inadvertently pushed out of the profession if redundancies are made mid - way through the school year . my youngsters have had a mix of excellent learning , including in nursery and in state education , as have youngsters in many families . i have a personal and constituency interest in wanting all education settings to thrive , so i agree with my right hon . friend . the economic and employment impact of this new tax will be devastating for bus drivers and maintenance teams . it will impact on so many livelihoods and communities . the people picking up the unknown impact will be in the state sector . the policy will just deliver more of the unknown . my hon . friend makes a very good point . rose — i will take one more intervention before making progress , so as not to try your patience too much , mr speaker . it is not that my patience is being tested , but i do worry when shadow secretaries of states cover a subject at length . i understand , but we need to get on , because lots of back benchers are desperate to get in . in fact , we have a very eager opposition whip coming in now . you will find out , mr speaker , that i will not test your patience . i want to take my right hon . friend back to the point he made about the education secretary ’s tweet , which i thought was disgraceful . [ hon . members : “ where is she ? ” ] the divisive language behind that tweet was a disgrace , given the many independent schools that work hard and play by the rules . does my right hon . friend agree that the embossed notepaper that the secretary of state focused on is sent to many children who are being sponsored through bursaries or scholarships , and whose parents work hard to give their children the best education ? the education secretary should apologise for that disgraceful tweet . i am grateful to my hon . friend , who , as ever , makes important points . i too am disappointed that the education secretary is not with us for this important debate . i will make progress , mr speaker , because i do not want to go on longer than i should . to be clear , we want to talk first and foremost not about revenue , but about education , schools and children — all children . [ interruption . ] no , i have been talking about schools and children throughout . if the government insist on ploughing on with this divisive policy , they must at least exempt certain groups of children for whom it would be especially unjust or counterproductive to impose this tax . surely , schools that charge the same as , or even less than , the average cost of a school place were not in the government ’s sights when they devised this scheme . there are small religious groups that have no state sector provision for their denomination . why should they be disadvantaged ? the continuity of education allowance exists expressly to support families who are serving our nation in the armed forces . surely they should be protected . the government acknowledge the role of centres of advanced training and performing arts schools that come under the music and dance scheme , because , again , there is no equivalent specialist schooling available in the state sector . then there are the many children who receive special educational needs support , including those with an education , health and care plan , whether or not they are at the school named in the plan , and those children who are applying for a plan . rose — i ask my hon . friend to forgive me , as i must make progress . as for children whose parents are priced out of a school , or face its closure , disruption to learning can be difficult at any time , but it is even more problematic when pupils have started a public examination course . their next school might not even offer the subjects that they were taking , or the exams might not be marked by the same exam board . we need to think about those children . the tax levy should be postponed until pupils who are now in years 10 or 11 , or in the lower and upper sixth form , have finished their exams — until 2025 or 2026 . the widest impact of all will be felt by state schools . ministers have said repeatedly that there is no problem because there are plenty of spaces in state schools . we have repeatedly pointed out that that is of no help at all if those places are in the wrong places or the wrong year groups . they need to be where and for whom they are required . state schools in my constituency are bursting at the seams . there are no spare spaces to move into for the more than 1,000 children being educated in independent schools there . the fees charged by those independent schools are a quarter to half of the cost of state school provision per pupil . i am grateful to the hon . gentleman . in buckinghamshire , we do not have the places . we have a lot of children in special education needs and disabilities schools , faith schools and other private schools . we can not cope with the capacity loss . we have parents who are sacrificing everything to send their child to a send school . there is no provision in the county for them . the policy will result in a crisis of transportation and places , and children will suffer as a result . i am grateful to both my hon . friend and let us be clear : local authorities have a duty to find spaces for children . they take that duty very seriously , and a number of them are considerably worried about what may happen . in - year admissions can be especially complicated in any case : they can involve not only governors but the fair access protocol panel and , ultimately , a secretary of state direction , all of which can add up to months out of school . creating additional physical space in schools obviously takes time , and building new schools takes longer still . time is needed to adjust , which is why our motion further calls on the government to “ postpone imposition of the vat charge for schools in areas where state schools in the relevant key stage are already on average ” almost full . this government barely have their feet under the table , and already they are a government in chaos . that chaos is exemplified by this destructive , disruptive and divisive education tax that will interrupt learning ; create place demand where it can not be accommodated ; put further strain on the send system ; hit specific groups that we ought to be trying to protect ; likely generate much lower revenue than anticipated ; and quite possibly even end up as a net cost to the public purse . in their headlong rush to make a political statement , the government appear simply to not have thought through the consequences . we call on them now to announce immediately that they are abandoning the unrealistic january implementation date , to publish a proper impact assessment , and then to entirely rethink this entirely counterproductive tax . this government were elected to break down barriers to opportunity . we are determined to fulfil the aspiration of every parent in our country to get the best education for their children . we are committed to doing so by improving state schools and making sure that every child has access to a high - quality education . we will start to make this happen by expanding early years childcare for all by opening 3,000 new nurseries across england . we will recruit 6,500 new teachers , alongside improving teacher and headteacher training , and we will roll out further mental health support to schools and colleges in england . those improvements to the state education system will begin our work to make sure every parent ’s aspiration for their children can be fulfilled . we want to get on with these important changes right away , and to do so , they must be paid for . that is why to help fund improvements to our state schools , we have made the tough but necessary decision to end tax breaks for private schools . in the july statement , the government announced that as of i know the minister to be an honourable man , so will he take this opportunity to apologise to the house in the absence of the secretary of state for education for the malicious and spiteful tweet that she put out this weekend ? that tweet was ill - advised , even if one believes that this policy is the right thing to do . neither i nor any of my colleagues will make any apology for wanting to improve state education across this country to make sure that the aspiration of every parent in our country to get the best possible education for their children can be fulfilled . that is why we have announced that any fees paid from the date of the july statement , this package of support will put thousands of teachers back into school classrooms in telford and across the country . has my hon . friend received any representation to say that if this change did not take place , those plans by this government — who were elected by the people of this country — would go ahead by any other means ? my hon . friend makes an important point about the reason why we have taken the tough decision to end tax breaks for private schools . it is to fund our education priorities , because we know that the way to improve opportunities for people right across this country is to make sure that our state schools can provide the best - quality education for all children . the minister was in a similar debate this morning , in which he heard a range of views . he is a treasury minister , not an education minister or the education secretary ; will he commit to publishing an impact assessment on the overall cost of this policy ? there were parents in the gallery listening to the debate this morning , and it is clear that there will be a legal challenge to this policy . will the treasury also publish the potential cost of that legal challenge and the bill that his department will be footing in order to meet it ? i thank the right hon . member for her contribution . first , in terms of an impact assessment , while developing these policies , the government have carefully considered the impact they will have on pupils and their families across the state and private sectors , as well as the impact they will have on state and private schools . in addition to having reviewed analysis published by third parties such as the institute for fiscal studies , the government have conducted their own analysis of the likely impacts of these policies , which draws on a range of sources . on a point of order , mr speaker . i am not going to give way , because i am responding to order . it is a point of order , so you do give way , unfortunately . i am grateful to you , mr speaker . could you give any advice to me on how we can ensure that the impact assessment that must have been conducted on this policy is shared with the house ? it is a fundamental — order . as you know , that is not a point of order — do not waste my time . carry on , minister . as i was saying to the right hon . member for witham , the government will publish a tax information and impact note on the vat policy change at the budget , once the independent office for budget responsibility has scrutinised and certified the costing of the final policy . will the minister give way ? i am still replying to the hon . member ’s right hon . friend . [ interruption . ] maybe conservative members could sort this out on their side of the house before they come into the chamber , but i will continue replying to the right hon . member for witham . turning to the legal cases , the government have considered the policy ’s interaction with human rights law and are confident that it is compatible with the uk ’s obligations under the human rights act . i hope that addresses the right hon . member ’s concerns . will the minister give way ? i will . i thank the minister for kindly giving way . this policy will have an economic impact in each and every constituency : on librarians , on maintenance people and on those who work in labs , in catering and as minibus drivers — everything that is predicated on schools such as the ones we are discussing . will the impact assessment and the treasury look at the wider implications for employment ? as the hon . member knows , there are established processes for developing tax information and impact notes . this one will be developed in line with the obr costing in the normal way and published alongside the budget , so she will see all the information . rose — i have given way quite a lot , so i am going to make a bit of progress . alongside the announcements about vat , the government announced in july that private schools in england with charitable status would lose their eligibility for business rates charitable relief from april 2025 , subject to parliamentary passage of the legislation . those changes were set out in a technical note that was published online alongside draft vat legislation , which together formed a technical consultation . as part of that consultation , the government — both at official and ministerial level — have engaged with a broad range of stakeholders , including the devolved governments . we have listened carefully to the points that people have raised with us . we recognise that while this policy will raise revenue to help support improvements in the state education sector , it may lead to increased costs for some parents and carers whose children are in the private education system . however , let me be clear : while private schools will now be required to charge vat on the education services and vocational training they provide , we expect that most private schools will be able to absorb a significant portion of this new vat charge and keep fee increases affordable for most parents . they will be able to make efficiencies and recover the vat they incur on the things they buy . those recovered costs can be used to offset increases for fee payers . we are already seeing that some schools have committed to absorbing the vat liability entirely , while others are choosing to cap fee increases at 5 % or 10 % to keep fees as low as possible for parents . i had a pop at getting the minister to give way during the debate this morning , and i appreciate his doing so now . i love the irony of what he is saying , which is , “ we need to do this to raise all this money , yet it is n’t actually going to raise all that much money because it can be reclaimed . ” on the impact assessment , it is really interesting that one line in the consultation document that went out this summer says : “ the government understands that moving schools can be challenging . ” how many of his own constituents have contacted him to say they will have to move schools as a result of this policy , and how do we measure the damage that moving schools is going to cause for so many children in our constituencies ? i have been clear : the government recognise that some pupils may subsequently move into the state education sector as a result of these policies . however , as is set out in a technical note — and i take it from the hon . gentleman ’s comment that he has read it — the “ number of pupils who may switch schools as a result of these changes represent a very small proportion of overall pupil numbers in the state sector . the government is therefore confident that the state sector will be able to accommodate any additional pupils ” whom this policy will cause to move . rose — i will make a bit of progress , because i have been quite generous in giving way so far . i want to address some of the questions that the shadow secretary of state asked in his speech , particularly about why we are introducing this policy from will the minister give way ? i am going to make some progress . hmrc will put in place a number of measures to ensure that all private schools can be registered ahead of rose — i am going to make some progress , because i have given way quite a lot so far . ahead of this policy being implemented , the government have carefully considered the impact that these changes will have on pupils and their families across both the state and private sectors , as well as the impact they will have on state and private schools . the government ’s costing of these policies is currently being scrutinised by the independent office for budget responsibility . the chancellor will confirm our approach to these measures at the budget , when we will set out our assessment of the expected impacts of this change in the normal way . we recognise that , as hon . members have said , these changes may lead to some pupils moving into the state education sector . while the impact of this policy is being fully considered , we know that projections by the institute for fiscal studies indicate that the number of pupils who may switch schools as a result of these changes is likely to represent a very small proportion of overall pupil numbers in the state sector — less than 0.5%—with any displacement expected to take place over several years . i am very grateful to the minister for giving way . this is about children — and even the prime minister made a choice to better the education of his children — so putting this in place in january , halfway through a year , is going to have a significant emotional impact on families and children . that is why it should be delayed . if it is good enough for the prime minister to make such choices for himself , why can not this government make choices for the rest of the nation , and support the most impacted families and children ? i have made clear the reason why we are proceeding with this policy to a january 2025 date , which is that we want to raise the money as soon as possible to invest in our improvements to state education . there will have been five months for parents and schools to prepare for the change . will the minister give way on that point ? i am still responding to rose — i am going to make some progress . to pick up the point made by the hon . member for hinckley and bosworth , i am not denying that some pupils may have to move into the state sector , but we expect much of this to take place at natural transition points , such as when a child moves from primary to secondary school , or at the beginning of their gcse or a - level years . as i have said , the ifs expects any displacement to take place over several years . we are confident that the state sector will be able to accommodate any additional pupils , and that these policies will not have a significant impact on the state education system as a whole . rose — i am going to make some progress . i am sorry , but i have taken a lot of interventions . i would like to address the issue of special educational needs . it is a point that many hon . members have raised , and i know that some parents are concerned about the impact of this policy on pupils in private schools with special educational needs . let me start by saying that we have considered this element of the policy very carefully . our proposed policy makes sure that pupils will not be impacted where they have acute additional needs and an education , health and care plan in england , or its equivalent in other nations , specifies that these can be met only in a private school . i thank the minister for giving way on that specific point , because he is relying on those schools still being open because other parents have not left . how will he address the situation in which parents of children needing that extra support rely on such schools for their special educational needs , yet those schools have closed because they can not afford to stay open any longer ? we will take a community - wide approach that sees improved send provision in mainstream state schools , as well as ensuring that state special schools cater for those with the most complex needs . as a parent of a disabled child , the issue of send education in this country is very important to me , as it is to a number of my friends and acquaintances . let us be clear that the send system in this country is broken , and it was the actions of the previous government that left us with parents being desperate and having to search for alternatives to mainstream education for their children . the vast majority of my constituents who find themselves without suitable education placements for their children , for reasons of disability or educational needs , are unable to afford to send their children to a private school . does the minister agree with me that perpetuating a system of inequality is not the solution for our broken send system ? i thank my hon . friend for her comments . she is absolutely right to say that we need to improve send provision for all children in this country in a financially sustainable way , and she speaks with great experience . rose — let me make a bit of progress . we want to improve state schools across this country so that when people have children with special educational needs , they never need to send them to a private school because the provision in state schools is better . that is the crucial point behind our approach , which my hon . friend rose — i am going to make a bit of progress , because i have been quite generous in giving way so far . i was talking about when ehcps in england , or their equivalents in other nations , specify that a child ’s education can be met only in a private school . in cases where pupils ’ needs can be met only in a specified private school , local authorities will fund their places and be able to reclaim the vat . similarly on business rates , the government are developing an approach to address the potential impact of these changes when private school provision has been specified through an ehcp . more widely , as we have just been addressing , we as a government are committed to transforming the system for supporting children and young people with send in all schools . we need to deliver better outcomes in a financially sustainable way . will the minister give way ? i am going to make a bit of progress . to address some other points raised in this debate , we know that a small number of diplomatic officials and service personnel are posted abroad for extended periods . in such circumstances , the foreign , commonwealth and development office and the ministry of defence provide the continuity of education allowance to ensure that this does not interfere with their children ’s education . i can give the reassurance today that the government will monitor closely the impact of these policy changes on affected diplomatic and military families , with any changes to the scheme being considered as—[interruption . ] order . i am sure the lib dems do not need coaching . i am not quite sure what happened there , but i will carry on . i was making an important point , which is that the government will monitor closely the impact of our policy changes on affected diplomatic and military families , with any changes to the scheme being considered as part of the ongoing spending review . will the hon . gentleman give way on that point ? i will make a bit of progress . in our consultation on the technical detail of this policy , we have been engaging widely and in depth , and the views of mps are an important part of that . as i said earlier , it has been a tough but necessary decision to end tax breaks for private schools . we believe it is the right decision , and one we need to implement as soon as possible to help raise the funding that we need to deliver our priorities for state education in this country . we are determined to make sure that education , which is available for all , is of the highest possible quality , because that is how we ensure that we meet the aspiration of every parent to get the best possible education for their children . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . thank you very much , mr speaker , and i am grateful for the health secretary ’s advice—[interruption . ] i did not need coaching — you will hear that soon enough . when i heard that today ’s debate would be about schools , i thought , thank goodness , we are finally going to give the crisis in our classrooms the attention it deserves and have a long , overdue serious debate about the squeeze on school budgets , the shortage of specialist teachers , the dangerous state of many school buildings , the crisis in special educational needs provision , or the mental health of children , but no . in fairness , expecting the conservative party suddenly to start prioritising those issues in opposition , after it spent years neglecting them in government , would be foolishly optimistic . nevertheless , i hope that we will have the chance to debate them properly soon . a priority for the liberal democrats is ensuring that every child , no matter their background , gets the support and attention that they need at school , so that they leave with the skills , confidence and resilience to be happy and successful . that means the government investing in education as we invest in other vital infrastructure . in fact , liberal democrats believe that education is the single best investment we can make in our children ’s potential and our country ’s future . that is why in our manifesto we set out a number of ways to make that investment . we argued that putting a dedicated qualified mental health professional in every primary and secondary school was important . we argued for an increase in school and college funding per pupil , above the rate of inflation every year . we argued for school meals to be extended to all children in poverty , and for a tutoring guarantee for every disadvantaged pupil who needs extra support . that package of investment in our state schools would improve and boost the performance and opportunities for every child , as well as closing the attainment gap that limits the life chances of too many children from disadvantaged backgrounds . crucially , we set out in detail how it could all be paid for , including by increasing the tax on social media firms who have done so much to worsen the mental health crisis in our schools . that is a much bolder package of investment than the one this government have set out so far , and it is paid for fairly , not by taxing parents ’ own investment in their children ’s education . i think the shadow education secretary was advocating raising income tax to invest in education—[interruption . ] even for a lib dem that is pushing it . the shadow education secretary was suggesting to the minister that that is where he could find some money—[interruption . ] order . if members wish to intervene , they should do it properly . let us not have side banter , as the rest of the chamber needs to get in as well . thank you , mr speaker . as we have a treasury minister rather than an education minister opening the debate for the government , i say gently that he should look at what the liberal democrats proposed on reforming capital gains tax as a way to fund some of the important investment that we need in education , rather than looking at taxing parents ’ choices to invest in their children ’s education . the government ’s policy would undermine two important principles . first , education should simply not be taxed . as we have heard , all education provided by an eligible body , including university education , music lessons , and tutoring are exempt from vat , and vat should not be imposed on any of those things because education is fundamentally a public good . secondly , parents have the right to choose what education setting is best for their child . as liberals we have always championed choice , and believe that nothing should get in the way of those important choices . of course we want to get to a point where every parent can choose a local state school that meets their child ’s needs and gives them the best possible start in life , and opportunities to flourish . but let us be honest with ourselves : that is not the reality facing many parents today , especially when their children have special educational needs . liberal democrats have many times raised the crisis in send provision . conservative cuts to school and council budgets mean that many parents and carers simply can not get their children the support they deserve . the minister talked a moment ago about sorting out state - school send provision , so that no parent with a child with send would need to send their child to a private school , but does he recognise that in order to sort out and fix our broken send system we will need not millions but billions of pounds ? i am not entirely sure that the chancellor will be giving that kind of money to the department for education . in my constituency there are three independent schools , one of which is a choir school . in one of those independent schools there are 29 children with diagnosed send , and only one with an ehcp with that as the named school . does my hon . friend agree that given the crisis in attaining ehcps , especially in west sussex county council , which is ranked fifth worst in the country and where only 3.6 % of ehcps are given within the statutory framework of 20 weeks , there needs to be more support in dealing with the deluge that this policy will cause county councils — order . may i suggest that interventions are meant to be short and not a speech , especially if you are on the list ? people are going to go down to a six - minute time limit shortly . please , think of others . i thank my hon . friend for that intervention . she is absolutely right to say that because only children with ehcps will be exempt from the vat charge , there will be the unintended consequence of adding yet further pressure to what is already a broken system . indeed , a parent in my constituency has written to me along those lines to say that they now feel that they will have to go through the application process . so many parents and carers are forced to navigate a postcode lottery and wait months , as my hon . friend said , to get the support that their children are entitled to . the hon . lady is a london mp like me , and part of the problem is that the term “ private schools ” covers such a wide category and such a multitude of sins . does she agree that this is also quite a london issue ? i have an unusually large number of these schools , with 14 in my boundary — there were 15 a year ago but one has since closed . i know my hon . friends on the front bench would be happy to meet me so i can feed in the comments that i hear at the advice surgery and when door knocking , which would take too long to recount right now . i thank the hon . lady for her intervention but i would gently say two things . first , i would not describe private schools as covering a “ multitude of sins ” . this is also not just a london problem . my hon . friend let me return to my point about special educational needs and disability . for many families , local state schools simply are not equipped to give those children the support they deserve . that is why , as we have heard , there are almost 100,000 children in independent schools who have special educational needs and disabilities but not an ehcp . that is tens of thousands of parents , not the super - wealthy , but carers , who are working hard and making tough choices so that their children can have the nurturing education they need . for 14 years — the first five under coalition government — state schools in telford and across the country were told to be efficient , more creative and innovative to save money as budgets were frozen and then cut . why can private schools not also be as efficient and creative to cut costs in their operations ? it seems it is one rule for one set of parents ’ children , and another rule for the vast majority of children . i point out for a start that when the liberal democrats were in government , school budgets increased in real terms , and we introduced the pupil premium to help the most disadvantaged children . when the tories were left to their own devices , they slashed budgets , and the pupil premium has been devalued over the years . i just want to return briefly to the topic of ehcps . we all know that there is a crisis in special educational needs . in my own constituency , a quarter of pupils attend an independent school . at least 700 or more students do not have an ehcp . those parents who are paying for places at private schools desperately want to get support for their children . does my hon . friend agree that it is crucial , if the government insist on pursuing an ill thought - through policy that impacts on children with special educational needs , that all children with diagnosed educational needs — with or without an ehcp — and those eligible for disability allowance should be exempt from that vat ? i would rather the government do not go through with this policy at all and drop it , but if they insist on pressing ahead with it , all children with special educational needs , whether or not they are on the send register — they can be identified in other ways — should be exempted . i will share a story from a constituent who contacted me recently . they have two children , both of whom have complex learning needs and have struggled to thrive in their local state school . after moving to a private school that was better able to support them , they are finally making progress and most importantly , to quote the parent , they “ do n’t feel like they are failing ” . the children ’s family has made huge financial sacrifices to give them this education , including remortgaging their home and cashing in pension plans . as this policy is set to be introduced in the middle of the school year , this family and thousands of others have little time to prepare or save . it will be disruptive for children who have already suffered enough disruption to their education in recent years . this parent who contacted me told me : “ we are terrified of the prospect of having to uproot our children for a second time because we ca n’t see a way to afford this rise . ” labour ’s rushed - through and ill thought - through plans will snatch opportunities away from thousands of children just like my constituents . you reflect on there being an exemption only for children who have ehcps , and you mentioned that there should be an exemption for children who do not have an ehcp based on sen or disability . my question is : how do you define that ? there is huge scope for private schools to say that they are send specialists . there is not a measure of whether that is the case . how do you define those who have send or those with additional needs , beyond the scope of an ehcp ? order . may i gently say to the hon . member that when you say “ you ” , it is as though i have said it ? i want to reassure you that i am not involved in any of this . mr speaker , i would not dare to second - guess your position on this issue . the best way to deal with this issue is to drop the policy entirely , but if we are to exempt children with special educational needs , a good place to start is the send register . just yesterday , i was discussing with one of the headteachers in my constituency the number of children on their send register and how they go about identifying them . schools already do that in the state sector to support children . we could apply those same rules and regulations in the private sector , and those children should be exempted . however , i would rather this policy was just dropped altogether . for all these reasons , the liberal democrats do not support ending the vat exemption for independent schools . instead , we want to see a better partnership between independent schools and local state schools . many already do that , and i am not just talking about a few bursaries here and free use of a pool there ; i am talking about genuine partnership working and the sort of brilliant collaboration that i have seen in schools in my constituency , where hampton school and lady eleanor holles school share staff time with reach academy in feltham . they have also been mentoring and coaching pupils for medical school and other university places , and the results have been phenomenal in a disadvantaged part of west london , where typically students were not going on to further or higher education . that partnership has borne immense fruit for those young disadvantaged people . stripping the politics out of this , it is abundantly clear that substance aside , the breakneck implementation is completely wrong and will throw families , children and communities into chaos . it will also compromise the work of schools such as eastbourne college , which does great stuff giving back to the community as part of the coastal schools partnership . does my hon . friend agree that if this government are to insist on this policy going ahead , they should at the very least delay it to ensure that our schools , our staff and our communities are not thrown unnecessarily into chaos ? i thank my hon . friend for his important intervention . as i have said before , it is best that the policy is dropped altogether , but if the government insist on going ahead , it should be delayed . we need further provision to exempt all special educational needs children , and not just those with ehcps . those are two critical factors in trying to mitigate the damage this policy will do . does my hon . friend recognise that thousands of children do not have ehcps ? my hon . friend i think many of us — certainly on this side of the house — would recognise the point my hon . friend makes , and many have already made it . i suspect that quite a few people on the government benches would also recognise that this policy will be a real challenge , because members from all parts of this house have been turning out in vast numbers at any debate on special educational needs to discuss the major crisis in our state school provision for send pupils . the system is broken , and it will have further pressures still . i come back to the point i was making on partnership working . the sort of exemplary work i was talking about benefits children in the state and independent sectors , and we want to see it become the norm in every part of the country . i fear that it will be one of the first things to suffer when schools are forced to make cutbacks under the government ’s policy . let us remember that most independent schools are no eton or winchester ; 40 % of them have fewer than 100 pupils . those small schools , often in rural places , will struggle to absorb this extra cost . does the member agree that the policy threatens the viability of many independent schools that have charitable status and serve deprived communities , including many independent schools in blackburn , such as faith schools and those schools serving children with special educational needs ? this policy will put those schools on their knees and vastly increase the number of spaces that will be required in public schools . in blackburn , we do not have those spaces . i gently say to the liberal democrat spokesperson that you have now been going 18 minutes . [ interruption . ] no , let me finish before you make a judgment call . i do not want you to speak for longer than the government minister , and we are shortly in danger of doing that . i am sure you will be coming to the end of your speech . i apologise , mr speaker . i was just coming on to the last paragraph of my speech , but i wanted to take some interventions from those on the liberal democrat benches . perhaps the answer should be that you cut the speech if you want to take more interventions . may i just finish by urging ministers to look , instead of a damaging and counterproductive tax on education , at ways to get independent schools to do more of that great partnership work with state schools and their communities and to ensure they are investing in that local community ? let us ensure that every child , no matter their background or circumstances , is given the support and opportunities they need to thrive . let us support investment in our education , not penalise it . we come to a maiden speech , and we are now on a six - minute limit . thank you , mr speaker , for calling me to make my first contribution in the house . it is a great honour to be here . i am so proud to be part of a government who are putting state education at the heart of our mission . i have not been an mp for long , but i have already spent a lot of my time visiting schools in my constituency , and i have seen and heard for myself the very real challenges that they are facing because of the effects of austerity on their budgets . opportunities for young people are shrinking in front of our eyes . i am glad that we are making these decisions so that we can invest more in the state education that 93 % of our children need . i would like to talk about the service of my predecessor as mp for north east derbyshire , lee rowley . a constant refrain for me when i was campaigning during the election was how well regarded he was as a constituency mp , which is not always what you want to hear when campaigning for the other side , but it is a clear sign of how well regarded he was by his constituents . i also pay tribute to his service in the house , where he served in various ministerial positions with distinction . i particularly recognise his important work campaigning on behalf of those with ovarian cancer . i am sure that everybody in the chamber will join me in thanking him for his service . it is a huge honour to represent my home , north east derbyshire . i will take a few moments to talk about what that place means to me , and indeed what home means to me . for many of my colleagues , home is where they were born or where they grew up . it is very much the origin of their journey , but for me and many others like me , it is the destination . as many of my fellow military veterans will know , i lived in over 11 different places over the past 10 years as a result of my military service . whether that was a small officer cadets ’ bedroom in the royal military academy sandhurst , kept to the ruthless standards of tidiness that that place demands — standards that may have lapsed since — my first posting to normandy barracks in the beautiful city of paderborn in germany , or indeed the compound in kabul where i served on operations , my accommodation has been varied , transient , occasionally used as target practice , and rarely felt like home . so when i say that i have found my home in north east derbyshire , that is because i have come home . when i turn off junction 29 of the m1 and see in the distance the latticework of green fields of holy moor , i know that i am home . when i am walking up market street to have a cuppa at the café host , or something stronger at the three horseshoes , i know that i am home . after a busy day ’s canvassing , when i am getting a superlative chippy tea at new tupton fish bar or a bacon cobb at woodheads in eckington , i know that i am home . when i am crossing the bridge over the river rother into killamarsh and i see the sign for that village , called by its original name — please forgive my anglo - saxon here — of chinewoldemaresc , i know that i am home , when i crest the hill at coal aston and see before me across the valley the town of dronfield , with the purple hills of the peak district in the distance , i know that i am home . i want to say thank you to the people of north east derbyshire for seeing in me the service and the values that they want to represent them in this place . i repeat the pledge that i made during my campaign that i will use each and every day here to serve you and deliver the future that i know we can have : a better future based not just on promises , but on real progress . the work of this government has already begun , and there is so much that i know will make a huge positive transformation for people in my constituency , whether that is renationalising railways so that we can be proud of the service they provide again , huge reforms to workers ’ rights and renters ’ rights so that we can end no fault - evictions , or the establishment of the child poverty taskforce so that we can drive down child poverty , just as labour governments have done before , and i know we will do again . there is much to do , and much that i am looking forward to being a part of . delivery matters . i want to speak briefly about why that is and about the effect that it has on our democracy . this is a subject close to my heart . as i have mentioned , i served in the military , and nobody is so much affected by the decisions of this house as my former colleagues . the decisions that colleagues sat in the chamber have made and will make will have a direct impact on their lives . those decisions could send them to dangerous places to do dangerous things . indeed , some of my former colleagues in the armed forces have not come back . i would like us all to take a moment now to remember corporal liam riley , who grew up in killamarsh in my constituency and lost his life in afghanistan . lest we forget . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear ! ” ] it is of deep concern to me when i see that the number of people voting has diminished over the past few years ; that so many people up and down the country see politics no longer as the mechanism by which we govern ourselves and bring the change that we want for our communities but as something done by some other people in some other place for the benefit of some other people . it is our duty to ensure that we leave this precious democracy that we have inherited in a better place than where we found it and that we show everybody that a vote for an mp matters , that a vote for a government matters , and that a vote for democracy matters . that is how we can make the difference in the small towns and villages that make up places such as my constituency of north east derbyshire . finally , there is a piece of advice that i would like to commend to the house . over the summer , i had the privilege of meeting clay cross air cadets . as i take my place in the house , i commend their motto , “ acta non verba”—deeds , not words . we can all agree that that is a good motto to have as a member of parliament , and indeed for the government . excellent . i welcome sadly , i turn to a decision by the government that does not have service to the country at its heart . this is a cruel , vindictive policy that will damage the prospects of children in both state and independent schooling . it is particularly damaging also for rural economies , which seem to have been entirely overlooked . in rutland and stamford , we have 10 independent schools that cater for a vast number of pupils — particularly those from military families and those with send — and what is common to all those families is how hard they work for their children to have the right education for them . i have received heartbreaking emails from parents who have had to sacrifice the education they have worked so hard for . one was from a mother of twins who are midway through their gcse year . there is no space in the state sector for them — twins who now question whether they will be able to sit their gcses because of this policy . the entire county of rutland has zero available state school spaces in years 10 and 11 , and only three send spaces . rose — is the hon . gentleman just going to stand , or will he ask to intervene ? will the hon . member give way ? there we go . i am most grateful to the hon . member . does she not think that a little bit of an apology from her and her colleagues for the disgraceful send system that they left as a legacy is merited ? as people can not get ehcps or support in the state sector , and councils and cash - strapped families are turning to the private sector , should she not apologise for the legacy that she and her colleagues have left the country ? i am so pleased that the hon . gentleman is repeating the lines that the whips gave him for this morning ’s westminster hall debate . i was not talking about send . it is deeply discourteous to the house to intervene on a member with a point that is completely separate from the point that they are making ; he will come to learn that in time . as i said , the entire county of rutland has zero available state school places for years 10 and 11 . that means children will now not be able to get their education . i ask the minister directly : what would he say to 16 - year - olds who are to be forced out of their school in january with no alternative place to go and nowhere to do their studies ? this is a vindictive policy , and it is absolutely wrong . i want to touch on the contribution to local rural economies . in rutland , education is the biggest single employer . as i said , we have 10 schools across 11 sites . in 2022 - 23 , one secondary school in rutland and stamford contributed £ 50 million to uk gdp . it contributed £ 30 million to local gdp , £ 14 million was paid in tax to hmrc , and savings of £ 5.5 million were made to local schools through school places that were not taken . some 70 % of this school ’s expenditure is on staffing and , with the imposition of vat , it is forecast to make a loss for the first time ever . jobs are being lost . when 70 % of the budget is staffing , what does a school do ? cuts have to be made in people ’s jobs . more than 2,000 people locally are employed directly by independent schools , and that is not to mention those working in the supply chain , whether driving buses , providing food or flowers , or working in cafés and shops . rural economies do not have many options at the moment , and independent schools are a bedrock for them . the economic impact of these jobs on rural communities should be considered in an impact assessment , but i very much doubt one has been carried out . looking at the national economic picture , the adam smith institute concluded that every child in independent schooling contributes £ 28,000 to the public finances . the average £ 2,700 saved on vat makes a return to the taxpayer of 1,040 % . if 5 % of independent school pupils leave , the government will generate £ 1 billion through this policy . if 10 % to 15 % of pupils leave , the government will generate no revenue . if 25 % of pupils leave , the government will lose £ 1.58 billion , because they are doing something vindictive and wrong . does the hon . lady agree that people putting their children through independent school are paying twice ? they pay once through their fees and once through income tax . if they are removed from the system , that will mean less money for education . the hon . gentleman is absolutely right . these parents have already paid into the state school system as if their child were going to state school , and they are net contributors to the local education system and the tax system , because they have chosen to ease the pressures on state schools by taking their child out . this is basic economics , and that is why the government do not understand it . independent schools make a huge and optional contribution to the national teachers ’ pension scheme . some could choose to mitigate their increased costs from the imposition of vat by opting out of the tps . what assessment has the minister made of the impact that this would have on the financial viability of the tps ? additionally , a number of independent schools in my constituency provide homes for children in foster care who would otherwise have no stability . these are the kind of schemes they will have to stop . that will again result in increased costs and impact on the state sector , which will have to pick these things up . it is a long - standing international norm to exempt education from sales taxes . nurseries , universities , tutors and other education providers are not included in labour ’s proposed vat increase , although as per my intervention on my right hon . friend there is also a question about the legality . senior lawyers , including lord pannick , have argued that this proposal will breach european convention on human rights rules on educational choice and access . what assessment have the government made of the legality of this policy ? i am already seeing the damage of this policy in the heartbreaking dilemmas facing families who have contacted me for help . for some pupils halfway through their exam years , there are no places in the state system . the requests are clear : the government must delay the implementation until at least the end of this school year , so that children are not disrupted in their education . we need to exempt those pupils in years 10 to 13 , so they can take their exams without the added pressure of a school move . we need to help local authorities to boost ehcp assessments rapidly , and we need to undertake a regional assessment of available state school places to exempt pupils who live in areas with no availability , such as rutland . i understand that the labour party wants to make an ideological attack on education and choice , but i urge ministers to sit down and think this through . the richest will continue to attend private schools and absorb the increased costs , while families who sacrifice day after day will suffer . for those who are interested , i did go to my local comprehensive , and my children go to their local comprehensive , but i think it is right that we support choice for all . tony blair once said , “ education , education , education . ” i urge the minister to listen to the ghosts of labour past and to do what is right for all children at both state and private schools , not what is right for reasons of ideological dogma , which is what the labour party is currently doing day after day . rose — many back benchers wish to contribute , and i want to make sure that that happens . back - bench speeches will be limited to four minutes , and maiden speeches to six minutes . we all love a debate , but every intervention eats into the contribution of another back bencher , so i ask members please to be mindful of that . i refer members to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i am pleased to speak in this debate . i am proud to do so for the first time since being put back in my place by the people of bury north . returners do not get to be maidens again , so i will just send my best to my predecessor and his family , as is customary . there was not much on which we saw eye to eye , but i respect his work and time in office . i know how losing feels , so i sincerely send him my very best . it will not surprise you , madam deputy speaker , but i speak in favour of this government ’s laser focus on tackling inequality in our education system . i support labour ’s plans to end the state subsidy of private schools , and it is right that they pay vat , as businesses expect to pay . i understand the aspirations of parents who work hard and save to provide for their children . i can introduce any member to thousands of them in bury north . many live in some of the poorest wards in the country . few could ever afford to pay for private education for their children , so i do not expect them to pay for the private education of someone else ’s children with a state subsidy and their own hard - earned money . forty - three per cent . of children in bury north live in poverty , and that is concentrated in just three of our nine wards . that is an abject failure of the conservative party ’s 14 years in government — a spike of 10 % in as many years . we can not ignore growing inequalities . under this government ’s plans , private schools will become subject to vat . although that presents new financial considerations for those schools , i would gently push back on the notion that the costs will automatically mean the same in terms of fee rises . private schools have a range of financial capabilities to absorb some of these costs : reclaiming vat on supplies and services ; drawing on interest from trust funds or assets ; considering how the fees for the use of school assets by the wider community can contribute to the overall budget ; introducing fee structures or fees for additional specialist support ; and joining with schools in neighbouring areas or nationwide to pay for centralised services . they will remain free to determine what to do , but that is necessary in considering business costs . none of this is new to schools . i have met some of the brilliant leaders in our private school sector . they are not exclusively innovative , but on a personal and character level , i have loved meeting them and those they teach . bury grammar in bury north is one example . however , as someone who served as a state school governor until recently , i have seen at first hand the budgetary pressures enforced on the schools that teach 93 % of our children . let us take a moment to consider the conservative party ’s time in office and what has brought us to this point . under its leadership , we saw an atomisation of our school system , zero accountability for multi - academy trusts , the narrowing of the school system , the off - rolling of children with different abilities , and many young people left without the support they need . it presided over a catastrophic financial crisis for local schools and authorities trying to support children with special educational needs , while sen families have faced immense frustration , misery and often obnoxious bureaucratic barriers . these parents are forced to navigate labyrinthine systems in pursuit of services that they are legally entitled to access but that remain hidden from view under lock and key . send services are really important to people in my constituency as well . does my hon . friend agree that we are not anti independent schools or private schools or the work that they do ? he is right when he talks about the whole state sector . does he agree that this is important ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . we are not anti . we are for the many and the few . conservative members want to remain in their comfort zone following their election defeat . we have all been there , but it is the wrong place to be . it is right that people pay vat on school fees . i was at a termly governors ’ meeting — opposition members will like this — when news of the last government ’s bare - minimum teachers ’ pay rise came through . there was some welcome surprise that the then government had done even the bare minimum . that was quickly replaced by the hard - headed financial reality from the business manager . they confirmed to the same meeting that , even with the 3.5 % that had been kept in reserve to meet the contribution they were expecting in bury to make the pay rise , they would face a budget deficit because the teachers would no longer be on strike . that is right — the tories designed a system where the leaderships of our state schools have to rely on the unfair treatment of our teachers in order to come in under budget . that is the reality that we face , and it is their everyday experience . there have been no maths teachers for year 11s , and the leadership have been weighing up whether to buy in multiple teaching assistants for cover rather than a science teacher for science — if they could find one . there is a huge amount to do , and this measure will only touch on a fraction of the legacy that labour must clear up from the last government and their 10 education secretaries . i call joe robertson to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i congratulate it is an enormous honour and privilege to represent isle of wight east . it is one half of the former isle of wight constituency and , if i may say , the better half of the island , only because its wise residents chose to elect a conservative mp unlike our neighbours in the west . i pay tribute to my predecessor bob seely , who served here with dedication , passion and commitment and made a genuinely significant contribution to our shared understanding of russia and ukraine , and of international relations more widely . i am sure that whatever the future holds for bob , he will continue to contribute in that sphere . i also pay tribute to his predecessor andrew turner , who served for 16 years and first got me involved in local activism while i was still at school . the isle of wight is known for many things and is much loved , not least of all for sailing . this week is genuinely significant for sailing , as sir ben ainslie and his team have qualified for the america ’s cup . the america ’s cup was first sailed for around the isle of wight in 1851 . unfortunately , the british boats did not win then , and we have never won it , so this is very significant . i send sir ben , sir jim and the whole team my sincere best wishes to bring back the cup to the isle of wight , where it belongs . the island is well known for its dinosaur fossil records and rock festivals , and as a holiday destination for many happy families from across the uk and internationally . our biggest town is ryde , which , together with sandown and shanklin , has some of the best beaches in the united kingdom . sandown is the home of the wildheart animal sanctuary , which is soon to welcome two new residents — two european brown bears are coming to the sanctuary very soon . in the south we have ventnor , known for its microclimate and bohemian atmosphere . we have ye olde kynges towne of brading , which dates back to roman times . brading roman villa is a popular visitor destination today , as is havenstreet steam railway . however , it is not just the fantastic places on the island and the wonderful scenery that make it special — it is the people . it is warm , generous people like sally grylls , a tireless campaigner for better dementia care and better support for those looking after their relatives with long - term frailties , and generous people like kirsty chapman at better days café , who help provide food and warmth to those who struggle . however long i have on these green benches , i hope to make my own significant contribution , particularly to the most pressing issue of our day : dealing with the pressures in health and , particularly , social care . the biggest reform the nhs needs is to deal with the pressure in social care , to relieve pressure on our hospitals . this government have said some good things about what they would like to achieve , and i urge them to act quickly . putting off every reform to a future commission that will report some months or years down the line is not dealing with the issue sufficiently quickly . there are things the government can already do , and i know from my time working for a national nursing charity immediately before entering this place that we can redirect existing funding better to community services , to help people live at home longer and avoid hospital admissions . i also hope to contribute to the debate on integrated uk transport . the secretary of state for transport has spoken much of buses and rail and improving passenger experience . but we are a collection of islands , and she has said nothing of ferry services . if the government fail to intervene on ferry services , my residents on the isle of wight risk becoming the only community in the united kingdom entirely reliant on foreign - owned , private , unregulated , debt - laden companies for essential travel — for health , to see their relatives and to access work and other essential services not available on the island . that can not be allowed to happen , and i urge the government to intervene . finally , on the debate today on taxing children ’s education , i remind the government that not every independent school is a wealthy , famous boarding school . there are good community independent schools such as ryde school on the isle of wight , which make a genuine contribution to the community in which they exist . the secretary of state put out an unfortunate tweet in which she said that she would prefer to see careers advice in state schools than astroturf for private schools . the private school on the isle of wight provides the only competitive astroturf on the entire island , and makes it available to the local hockey teams and football teams . the government must recognise that contribution . for however long i have in this place , i look forward sincerely to working with all members across the chamber , including my neighbour , i call john grady to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . it is an honour to have the opportunity to give my maiden speech today . i start by paying tribute to my two immediate predecessors , david linden and alison thewliss . they were thoughtful and conscientious members of parliament . david ’s diligent work included chairing the all - party parliamentary group on premature and sick babies , a topic that is close to my family ’s heart . i greatly respect alison and david , and thank them for their service to glasgow . i should mention two other predecessors , margaret curran and anas sarwar , who , after leaving this house , have continued their public service in africa and scotland with great effectiveness . it is a tough act to follow two great maiden speeches . the constituency of my hon . friend this debate is about schools . state education has been a huge part of my family ’s life . my mum and my two aunts were state school teachers . dad was a rebel , who trained teachers and taught english in a prison to immigrants . they all had a great passion for state education , and i see that passion every day in the teachers who teach my children and who teach in the state schools across glasgow east . many parents in glasgow east struggle to pay for the bare essentials — the cost of the school day . without being controversial — this is a maiden speech — those parents have great aspirations for their children . the duty of any government is to focus their finite and limited resources on those families across our nation . i must say something of glasgow east , the greatest of the glasgow constituencies . next year , glasgow will celebrate its 850th birthday . my seat is at the heart of it , with some of the greatest medieval architecture . glasgow green hosts the templeton building , which is better than anything in venice . george square is the heart of glasgow . my seat has an incredible cultural and artistic life . the young children i have listened to at the big noise project in govanhill , the glasgow schools create project and the east glasgow music school give me great comfort that the next 850 years have a bright artistic future . we also have some of scotland ’s finest venues , including the barrowlands ballroom where david bowie , among others , has played . gil scott - heron was one of the most significant north american musicians of the last century . i have no idea if he played in glasgow east , but his dad did : he was the first black player for glasgow celtic . the world ’s first black international footballer also played in glasgow east . andrew watson captained scotland against england in 1881 , and i am delighted to say that scotland beat england 6 - 1 . both , as black players , were pioneers . another football pioneer was baron ouseley , who passed away earlier this month . he was the founder of kick it out . i think everyone in this house would pay tribute to baron ouseley ’s immense contribution to our public life . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] like the footballer andrew watson , baron ouseley came to britain from guyana . one of glasgow east ’s greatest strengths comes from centuries of immigration . we have one of the oldest muslim communities in scotland , of which i am incredibly proud . people from across the world — roma people , nigerians , irish people and italians — contribute greatly to our city . immigration has been a source of joy , strength and energy in glasgow over its 850 years . returning to football , i must emphasise that i am entirely neutral about glasgow football — no good comes of taking a view — but i congratulate vale of clyde , the third - oldest scottish junior club , which has just celebrated its 150th birthday , and garrowhill thistle , who made it to the scottish junior cup final at hampden this year . i leave football by noting that kenny dalglish was born in my seat . king kenny was one of the best players of the beautiful game , but that is not the profoundest beauty of kenny dalglish ’s life . it is his devotion to the victims of the hillsborough disaster and their families . he has lived the famous liverpool saying , “ you ’ll never walk alone ” . it is that saying that encapsulates the people of glasgow east . many people in glasgow east face profound challenges with poverty and poor housing , but glaswegians are determined , hard - working and tenacious , and no more so than when it comes to looking after each other . if i may , i would like to give some examples . john ferguson mbe , a parkhead man , was the driving force behind the parkhead housing association . jimmy mutter fought hard to transform the gorbals . he succeeded . the volunteers at the glasgow south - east food bank , founded by audrey flannagan , have provided help to families in govanhill for many years . audrey , john and jimmy made sure that their constituents did not walk alone . the same can be said about many others in glasgow . their values are shared across our family of nations , from the isle of wight to the north of scotland , where my mother came from . the work of these great constituents i have mentioned points to our most urgent task : to fight against poverty . in glasgow ’s 850th year , my duty is simply to play my part in ensuring that no one in glasgow east , or anywhere in this family of nations , walks alone . i rise to speak on what i clearly see as an aspiration tax . i want to make it clear that all of my five wonderful children are in , or have gone through , state schools . one is in a school that requires improvement because of the catchment area we are in . my education was exceptionally poor . i went to the worst school in the area . i did not get any gcses , and when i was handed my results , the teacher said , “ there you go , anderson . i told you you ’d never make anything of your life . ” my experience of education was not good , but i am a conservative because i believe in opportunity . i did not have those opportunities as a child , but i believe that everybody should have them . there are about 1,000 children in my constituency who go to moor park school , bedstone college or concord college ; i have visited all three . bringing in vat for independent schools will create huge pressure . i believe that the measure is rushed . it has not been thought through , and it will have a massive impact on all those schools . some parents will be able to afford it and will not feel the pinch , but many parents i have spoken to in my constituency work two jobs , have one car and do not go on holiday . they do everything they can to give their children the best opportunity in life . that should be championed . we should not remove these opportunities . we should have great state schools across our country , but if somebody wants to work hard and strive , and aspires to give their children the best opportunities they can , we should not remove that . we do that at our own cost . growing up , my dad was a soldier , and my mum also served in the military . many of my friends at school moved around every two years or so . i , too , was a soldier and had children while i served in the military . i know the minister is a supporter of the armed forces , and even the secretary of state for defence has said how serious this measure is for military families . in this debate , there will be a lot of to - ing and fro - ing , but i urge the government to take seriously the impact that this policy will have on military families . to bring it in as a blanket measure will be detrimental . we will see people leave the armed forces ; that will be the cost . that would not be a good way to do this . i am asking for time . can we push this back ? we have talked about what to do to fill the gap . recruiting more people and raising the standard of state schools will not have happened by january , so we need to look for a time to bring in this measure ; mid - term does not work . the measure will have an impact on special educational needs and disabilities , and people who aspire to send their children to private school , but what is important to me and many of my constituents are military families . i urge the government to think about that , and come to a decision very quickly about military families , because people are deciding whether to stay in the forces or sign off . our great men and women in the armed forces need certainty that their children ’s education will not be disrupted . i call antonia bance to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i am honoured to speak for the first time in this house as the member of parliament for tipton , wednesbury and coseley . i represent the village of coseley in dudley , as well as the towns of tipton , wednesbury and hateley heath in sandwell . in the last parliament , shaun bailey was a tireless advocate for this special corner of the black country , and i wish him well as he resumes his legal studies . let me tell you about tipton , wednesbury and coseley . we are an industrial constituency , shaped by factories , foundries , mines and canals . we have beautiful parks , laid out for the leisure of working people , and civic buildings of grace and gravitas , such as the grade ii listed tipton central library and the 16th - century st bart ’s in wednesbury . but more than anything , we have the people of the black country — creative , ingenious , hard - working and down to earth people like thomas barratt . born in coseley , he stopped the enemy advance and saved his patrol at ypres . he was a boilermaker , awarded the victoria cross posthumously at just 22 . the workers of tube town , the metal finishing capital of the world , went out on strike for two long months in 1913 for a decent wage . they were backed all the way by their wives , heroes in their own right , who somehow kept 25,000 families fed amid near destitution . they won . i am proud to say that their union became my union , unite . workers have come to the constituency from ireland , the caribbean , bangladesh , kashmir and punjab ; they left their homes to provide for their families , facing racism but prevailing , building churches , temples , mosques and gurdwaras , and seeing their children succeed . we are a proud , working - class community . too often , people have stood in this place and talked our area down . i will never . of course , the name “ black country ” is for the smoke of heavy industry ; there has been coalmining , steel fabrication , metal finishing , and nail , brick and chain making . we are where the industrial revolution started . james watt ’s first steam engine hauled coal in tipton , at the bloomfield colliery . today , despite everything , a quarter of all workers in our area are still in manufacturing . we may be the black country , but modern manufacturing is clean , high - skill and high - wage . in sandwell , 1,000 firms — with 21,000 jobs — make everything , from street furniture to hinges to locks to the precision metal forming for aeroplanes and power plants . i am proud to wear the “ made in britain ” badge , and to back our new deal for working people . if we are to have a new industrial revolution here in the uk as we meet the challenge of climate change , let us make it with our hands and our brains , in the place that was the crucible of the first industrial revolution , the black country . i stand for no more and no less than this : prosperity for every family . my friends at the tuc worked out that if wages had risen in the last decade by the amount by which they rose between 1997 and 2010 , the average worker in my constituency would be £ 93 a week better off . that is nearly five grand a year more in people ’s pockets . in the black country , we work hard , but forces bigger than any individual — deindustrialisation , thatcherism , and the cruel austerity of these last 14 years — mean that good folk there earn less and have fewer chances and fewer choices than people elsewhere . fully half of our kids grow up below the poverty line , in infested b&bs , in homes with damp dripping down the walls , or in flats made for two , but home to three times that . for many , most weeks , the money stretches , just about — until the week when it does not . i want to turn the thoughts of those in this house to the young people in my constituency , almost none of whom go to fee - paying schools . four in 10 kids in my constituency did not get grade 4 gcse in maths and english last year . that has to change , and we will change it . as i stand here today , the obstacles to delivering prosperity , and more than that — comfort , security , leisure — to every worker and every family seem almost insurmountable , but we take heart from our history : from ernie bevin , who forged the working - class women and men of the uk into an industrial machine that , from a standing start , equipped our country for victory . in my area , those in saucepan factories made grenades , and car makers built the machines to defeat fascism . that is a reminder that once we turn our minds to something , the ingenuity and drive of the british working class can rarely be equalled . it is for us , here , to set it free . i will always stand against decline and for progress . after all , i grew up in a world where people like me could not get married , but now our beloved daughter has both her mamas ’ names on her birth certificate . to believe in progress is to believe that once again this country can work for working people . it is time , madam deputy speaker , so my final words are to the people of our towns . tipton , coseley , wednesbury , hateley heath : i am here to serve you always . i thank unfortunately , however , that defence of socialist principles runs like a thread through the labour party today . it should not come as any surprise that this new labour party , which is willing to tax some of the poorest pensioners in the country , has no compunction about taxing some of the most needy children in the country — a shameful act . i am not talking only about the more than 3,000 pupils in my constituency who receive an independent education ; i also speak for the many thousands in the state sector on whom this policy will have an impact . labour members seem to forget completely about the impact on the state sector . as i walked along firgrove hill in farnham during the election campaign , i met a father who had just heard that the independent school to which he was going to send his two children had closed . that was in july , and there was no place at the local state school , weydon — a fabulous school . even if it had spaces , however , that father would not have been able to send his children there , because he had not sent his children to a feeder school , so even if there are places , not all children can get in . this measure will have a massive impact on education for those with special educational needs and disabilities . there are independent send schools in my constituency , including more house , a fabulous boys ’ school . jonathan hetherington , the headmaster , has spoken passionately about what this policy will do to his school : 60 % of his pupils are on an education , health and care plan , which means that 40 % will be affected by the tax . what will happen to those pupils ? for one thing , they are likely to drop out immediately because their parents can not afford it . perhaps they will then apply for an ehcp , but it will take many months , if not years , for them to get it , and they will be out of education during that time . it is a total disgrace . equally importantly , when they get the ehcp , it will add a massive cost to the local authorities , which are already overstretched . the simple fact is that independent send schools are saving those authorities money . we also have to realise that independent schools are huge employers , certainly in my constituency . in june , during the election campaign , i knocked on a door in an area that was not affluent — in fact , it is the most deprived part of my constituency . the gentleman who opened the door informed me that he would be voting conservative because of labour ’s potential policy on this matter . when i asked him why , he said that he was a groundsman at one of the local independent schools , and feared for his job because the school was likely to close ; so this policy affects the economy as well . if education is not a charitable purpose , and if educating our children is not a fundamental principle that we in this house should support , i do not know what we are here for . labour needs to review this policy , and scrap it as soon as possible . you might imagine , madam deputy speaker , that members of the conservative party would understand how out of touch they are on these matters , given that they were so roundly rejected by the electorate in july . however , unsurprisingly , they have demonstrated perfectly that nothing has changed , and it is business as usual as they leap to the defence of tax breaks for private education . this government believe in equality of education for all our children , and this policy is designed for the betterment of 93 % of the uk school population . only 7 % of children in the uk go to a private school — a far smaller proportion than in the most recent conservative cabinet , 65 % of which , it is believed , were privately educated . perhaps that tells us something about why we are debating this matter today . conservative members campaigning against the government ’s policy couch it as an attack on the aspiration of hard - working parents . perhaps they need to be reminded that the warehouse workers , cleaners , shop workers , carers , nurses and teachers in my constituency are also aspirational for their children . they work just as hard to provide the best opportunities for their children . it is offensive in the extreme for the conservatives to suggest otherwise , and to suggest that they are less deserving of support from this government . i accept that a consequence of this decision may be that some people will no longer be able to send their children to private school , as schools might choose to recoup the cost of vat through increases to fees . however , we should acknowledge the fact that private schools have implemented above - inflation increases to their fees year on year in recent times — over 20 % in real terms since 2010 — and this has had a minimal impact on children moving into the state sector . i say directly to parents : should our ambition not be that they could send their child to a fantastic state school that has the teachers and resources it needs to deliver the education their child deserves , and where they can excel both academically and culturally by mixing with children from a wide range of backgrounds and experiences that reflect the society in which we live ? the conservative party was quite keen to promote and exacerbate a two - tier approach to the education of our children during its term in government — a system in which it is only state - educated children who have to accept tough choices and shoestring budgets . we have schools where the ceilings are propped up by scaffolding , schools where teachers are forced to buy basic school supplies out of their own pay packets , and schools where the workload and conditions have become so dire that teachers are leaving in droves . i am delighted that we now have a government who do not believe that state schools alone should be asked to make difficult choices — a government who will end the tax break for private schools and invest the £ 1.3 billion that that choice will generate into our state schools , which educate 93 % of our children . that is why i will be voting against the opposition motion and in favour of state education . i call john milne to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . first , i would like to pay tribute to my predecessor , sir jeremy quin , who represented horsham for the last 10 years . he was a dedicated mp , and in my first couple of months i have heard praise from many constituents for his past help . an mp ’s best work is often unsung and behind the scenes , and i intend to continue his campaigns on issues such as child trust funds . i would have to go back very much further to find a fellow liberal mp to celebrate—144 years , to be precise . being a rock - solid safe seat in a first - past - the - post system is not great for democracy . so many people have come up to me since the election and said it is the first time their vote has ever counted . horsham ’s turnout was over 70 % , and if we had proportional representation , we would see that level of engagement everywhere . for most of my life , i worked as a creative director in advertising , before becoming a local councillor five years ago . i would especially like to thank my family , who are up in the gallery today , for supporting me in this unexpected career change , because this is a huge journey for all of us , not just me . most of horsham is open farmland , with patches of ancient woodland and villages that retain a strong sense of community . horsham town itself is pretty enough to be charming , but not so temptingly chocolate - boxy that it gets overwhelmed by tourists . as the name suggests , horsham was once a home for horse trading , and to this day it is a centre of excellence in the equestrian industry . horsham is also where our great national poet percy bysshe shelley grew up . with luck , we will see him around town again soon if fundraising for a statue in his honour is successful . we have high - achieving schools , both state and private , and we want to keep it that way . many of them have approached me with concern over the vat imposition . although horsham has never been the site of a major battle , it is where the dalek invasion of earth started through the work of ray cusick , the bbc theatrical designer and long - term horsham resident . but perhaps the jewel in the crown of the constituency is the knepp estate , the uk ’s leading rewilding enterprise , which now has international fame . this is no frozen museum of conservation ; it is a living , breathing experiment in flora and fauna , where nature herself is the key architect . of course , horsham is not immune to national challenges , from a creaking health service to cuts in public transport and crumbling roads , but today i want to focus on the positives . horsham is a great place to do business . it is hard to believe it now , but horsham was once a centre of england ’s iron industry . later we became a leading brewery town , and today that tradition is carried on by energetic start - ups like hepworth , weltons , kissingate and brolly brewing , which rather enterprisingly came up with a lib dem - branded beer during my campaign . we are home to creative assembly , one of europe ’s largest video game designers ; schroders , a world - class investment company ; and innovative tech businesses like metricell , which might one day help us solve our pothole problem — that would surely be worth a nobel prize . whereas many high streets have struggled , horsham ’s is bustling — a shopping destination for not just local residents , but visitors alike . i urge members to join us at the carfax bandstand on a friday evening in the summer , where the district council has pumped new energy into the town with a series of free events themed on everything from ska , abba , pride and bollywood to german oompah music . after a quietish first 1,000 years , horsham is learning how to party . whereas other communities have been losing their local theatres , ours is getting a multimillion - pound investment to help the council reach its net zero targets . after the last revamp , under the tories , the theatre reopened with that surefire box office attraction , “ an evening with ann widdecombe ” . i wonder if she is still available . as a constituency that is now half town , half rural , horsham plays a lead role in striking a balance between competing needs . we have large areas of productive farmland , making a valuable contribution to food security , but the same land is under pressure to provide housing and renewable energy installations . all of these are positive things , but the same land can not do them all at once . if there is one thing i would like to focus on during my term , it is housing . i strongly support the new government ’s house building ambitions , but i am surprised and disappointed to see that they are using the same flawed system to fix local targets as before , except with a bigger stick . the standard method , as used since 2018 , has been shown to be a hopelessly inaccurate way of assessing local need , nor will it ever make housing more affordable . in horsham , the average price of a new house is higher than that of the existing stock , so the more we build , the higher our target goes — the exact reverse of what is supposed to happen . horsham already has 13,500 unbuilt permissions . we will be forced to continue building houses that people can not afford to satisfy a local need that does not exist , while heaping further stress on to already overloaded local services — and then we are surprised when people say they do not like it . just to make things more complicated , horsham has its own unique challenge , known as water neutrality , which restricts water use for environmental reasons . we are caught between two government directives that completely contradict each other . one rule says we have to build a fixed number of houses per year , but the other rule says we are not allowed to build any houses at all because we can not use any more water without damaging the environment . we are being punished for failing to build the houses we are not allowed to build . this is a planning system devised by kafka , not beveridge . for all the challenges , i would like people to see horsham as a place of opportunity . for everything that is going wrong , something else is going right . it is a huge honour to represent the people of horsham — one that i never expected to have . as someone who campaigned on a promise to serve as a constituency mp , i could not ask for a better constituency to work for . to make sure that we get in as many valuable contributions as possible , back - bench speeches will now be limited to three minutes . please be mindful . i congratulate with 25 years ’ experience of teaching and working as a deputy headteacher in state secondary schools , i have had to manage the struggles that schools face day in , day out . children have seen more non - specialists in key subject areas , a reliance on cover teachers , class sizes increasing and school staff burdened with excessive workloads . all this has had a negative impact on learning and on children simply enjoying school , despite the heroic efforts of dedicated teachers and support staff . but the damage is not limited to schools ; it spills out beyond the school gates into the wider community . there can be no denying the need for greater investment in the state education system , and it will be this new government ’s priority to fix the damage caused by years of conservative neglect . it is important to start by saying that this entire policy is dogmatic and rooted in the politics of envy — that really is self - evident . it comes from a self - serving socialist government that are ignorant and blind to the harm that it will lead to for families up and down the country . in the time that i have , i would like to pose a series of questions directly to the government . this is not only a bad policy ; there has been no information on its implementation and what it means for private schools and state schools . that has been raised by shadow front benchers and i think we should get some transparency . i would like a response later on . when the minister responds , i would also like to hear the details of the costs caused by adding vat to school fees and the cost of the removal of the business rates exemption . the house has a right to hear where the impact assessment is , what the fiscal projections will be and what the costs will be across every government department that is affected . that will be the department for education but also the ministry of housing , communities and local government , because it is local councils that will continue to pick up the costs . i put a question about this next matter directly to the exchequer secretary , who was also in the westminster hall debate this morning . we know that legal action is coming , and i think that the government should fess up and tell us what percentage of the dfe budget will be put aside to fund the legal challenge . there are parents out there who are so unhappy about this — we met some of them this morning — and they are adamant that they will pursue legal action . there are many other questions , such as about justification and the implications for local authorities , but i think the point about send is important . the house of commons has published a note that says that for 2024 - 25 , the previous government had been increasing send funding to over £ 10.4 billion in real cash terms . is that funding going to go up under this government , in anticipation of the implications of this policy for children with special educational needs ? that could include a growing demand for education , health and care plans . local authorities are failing , and many of them are labour authorities . some of them have gone bankrupt as well in recent years . there will be an impact on state schools , as they will have to accommodate additional pupils . we need some honesty and transparency around this . class sizes are going to increase in state schools . how is that going to increase the educational outcomes of children attending state schools ? how is that going to raise the bar and increase standards in state schools ? we all believe in good educational outcomes for all children across the entire country and we want our education system to be first class and to serve all children , but fundamentally this is just an ill - thought - out policy that will have more costs associated with it and devastating impacts for children attending independent schools . i ask the minister in his summing up to show a little bit of humility—[interruption]—and recognise the implications for these children . labour members are giggling , but actually this is about children and about the impact of this policy on children whose education will be affected . it is a privilege to follow so many excellent maiden speeches today . i am glad to have this opportunity to talk about schools and education because there is no doubt that schools face very real funding constraints . in my constituency , there are state schools that have been forced to let staff go because the funding just is not there . the institute for fiscal studies calculates that , after school - specific inflation has been deducted , per - pupil funding rose by 0.7 % in primary schools over the last 14 years and that spending shrank by 0.5 % in secondaries . that compares to real increases of between 5 % and 6 % over the preceding 13 years . figures released in response to a written parliamentary question show that over the last five years , per - pupil funding in birmingham grew less fast than in the west midlands and across england as a whole . in fact , while per - pupil spending will have risen by just under 21 % between 2020 - 21 and 2024 - 25 , cpi inflation will have increased by about 24.5 % . in other words , this is a real - terms cut of around 3 % , or a loss of around £ 179 for each child . some of the schools in my constituency have some of the highest pupil premium rates in the country . these are not just statistics ; they represent a loss of opportunity , a loss of skilled and dedicated staff , and the overcrowded classrooms that flow from that . at this point i draw the house ’s attention to my declarations in the register of members ’ financial interests and my background as an officer of the gmb , one of the unions that represents school support staff . there is much for schools and parents to welcome in this government ’s approach , including ending single - word inspection judgments , funding free breakfast clubs , reusing space from falling pupil numbers to create new early - years provision , committing to a new child poverty reduction strategy — the first since the child poverty act 2010 was repealed — and reinstating the school support staff negotiating body . it has been welcome in this debate to hear the concern for school support staff roles in the independent sector . i am sure that will extend to the state sector and i hope that we will see cross - party support for that measure . i want to make a point around send . the motion would exempt all children on send support from the vat policy , but send support status is determined within schools , and schools in the independent sector do not have the same budgetary restrictions as state schools , which are obliged to set aside nominal send budgets . there is a real risk of creating false incentives , as the “ today ” programme ’s 2017 investigation demonstrated . ours is the right policy , and this is the wrong motion . i look forward to voting against it later today . one in four pupils in surrey go to an independent school , including more than 4,000 pupils in my constituency , and many of those pupils have a special educational need . we have had an increasing rise in the diagnosis of conditions such as autism . the proposal is being pitched as a fundraising measure , but i do not think anybody on the labour benches came into parliament to raise funds from pensioners in poverty and families of children with special educational needs . i will come on later in my speech to whether this will raise any money at all . in his wind - up , i hope the minister will address this point : what justification can there be to an immediate exemption of specialist schools from the tax ? on some labour members have asked why those children could not be served by the state sector . we increased funding for the send sector by 70 % over the last few years , but you can not magic up 99,000 places overnight . a teacher at moon hall in reigate said that 70 % of their pupils were on ehcps and 30 % were not , and that all those children would suffer . the other point is that the state sector will have larger class sizes , so rather than improving the state sector , all children in the state sector will suffer . they will all have worse outcomes . the secretary of state for education should care about outcomes , not ideology , but it is clear that she does not because we have seen teachers ’ unions warning about the impact on the state sector . the government have not published an impact assessment . according to the institute for fiscal studies ’ report that members have been quoting , we do not know how much money will be raised due to the uncertainties over children with special educational needs . i appeal to all labour members to ask themselves and their consciences why we can not exempt children with special educational needs from this tax ? it will not raise any funds . it will increase class sizes in the state sector and affect the outcomes of all children . it must be reversed . fourteen years of conservative chaos have left behind a trail of destruction in our state education system , which is used by 94 % of our children . is it not time that we put our effort into improving the state education system ? when i knocked on doors before the election , one of the main questions i was asked was , “ where will we get the money to put right everything that has been put wrong by the last government ? ” leaving aside the £ 22 billion shortfall , we now need to find extra money to recruit extra teachers , to provide extra nurseries , breakfast clubs and mental health support in our schools , and to make all the other positive changes that this government intend to make to create opportunities for all . my hon . friends have already highlighted the things we need to address in the state education system . ultimately , private schools are businesses that have enjoyed an exemption from vat being charged on their fees , and it is now time to end that exemption . i have three private schools in my constituency , and i have had meetings with the two that wanted to meet me . i have had discussions with parents from those schools . it is a fallacy to suggest that lots of students will leave their private school to go into the state education system . i have been asked whether this government have considered the timing of the policy ’s implementation : to reassure parents , i believe the exchequer secretary to the treasury , my hon . friend there appear to be two parts to this debate : ideology and practicality . fair play to the labour government — when they came in , they said that they intended to introduce this proposal . they told the public and put it in their manifesto , for which i respect them . that is important , especially when compared with their policy on winter fuel payments . but it is hard to see how it is not ideological , when the secretary of state for education has tweeted : “ our state schools need teachers more than private schools need embossed stationery . our children need mental health support more than private schools need new pools . our students need careers advice more than private schools need astroturf pitches . ” this reeks of prejudice and propagates a class war , and i am sorry to say that the secretary of state is not here to defend her tweet . she is a decent woman , and i would like to think that she would apologise . as i said , this is a manifesto commitment , and the labour government have a mandate to deliver it , but they also have a mandate to deliver it in a way that takes the impact into account . in response both to today ’s debate and my questions to the leader of the house , we have heard that ministers have seen an impact assessment . if they want to champion this plan , why not share the information with everyone ? one private school in my constituency that will be affected , dixie grammar school , has simply asked , “ why can we not see what the impact will be ? ” that is not an unreasonable question . as i said to the minister earlier , children are at the heart of this . i do not see the rush to implement this policy in january . the prime minister put his child in an apartment because he was worried about the impact on his child ’s education . i respect that decision , but does he not see the problem with implementing a policy that will have exactly the same kind of impact by tearing kids out of their schools ? mark my words : it will happen . that is what the two private schools in my constituency have said . where is the report addressing the impact on their education ? in my constituency , the biggest problem will be that we do not have the school places for pupils who move out of private schools . what will happen then ? we have not heard how this government will deal with that , and that is the fundamental issue . how will children and families cope ? the prime minister insulated his child , but how will the government insulate the nation ’s children ? i am delighted to take part in this debate , as i am always grateful for the opportunity to praise and defend our public services , particularly our state schools , and the millions of people , including the vast majority of my constituents , who rely on them . the opposition motion “ regrets that the government has decided to impose vat on independent school fees ” . well , i regret that the last tory government did all they could to deliberately and carefully dismantle , defund and destroy our public services , including state schools , for 14 years—[interruption . ] there is a huge amount that i could say , but we are pushed for time and many members want to speak , including lots of government members . i know there are more of us here—[interruption . ] every day , indeed . there is a lot that deserves to be said about our schools . we have heard many conservative members ask about the impact . they suddenly care about the impact of decisions made in this place , but where was their talk of impacts over the past 14 years ? in st helens north , 81 % of schools have had real - terms funding cuts since 2010 — over £ 3 million in real terms , or £ 239 for every pupil . where was the consideration of impacts when the last government cancelled labour ’s building schools for the future programme and watched our state schools crumble ? where was the talk of impacts when the last government presided over a send system that is failing over 1 million children and that their own education secretary described as a “ lose - lose - lose ” ? where was the concern for impacts when standards fell , which they did ? will the hon . gentleman give way ? no , i am pushed for time . where was the consideration of impacts when the inspection system did not and does not work for parents , schools or pupils ? where was the consideration of impacts when child poverty increased ? where was the consideration of impacts when the lack of investment in school support staff and basic resources meant that teachers were buying resources for their pupils ? where was the consideration of impacts when we had a recruitment and retention crisis among teachers ? we could talk about all these issues if the conservatives truly wanted a debate on schools , but they do not . they could have used today ’s opposition day debate to talk about these things , but instead they have used their time to talk about our decision to end a tax exemption that benefits only the wealthiest . they showed no concern whatsoever for state schools over the past 14 years , and now they are apparently concerned about impacts . i make it crystal clear that the parents of state school pupils are every bit as ambitious , loving and hard - working as those who can afford to send their children to private schools . i stand with them , and i stand with our state schools . others have talked about the effect on children of military families and on children with special educational needs , as well as the impact on friendships , mental wellbeing , jobs in both state and private schools , and the bursaries , but i will focus on students in exam years . i declare an interest as i have three children in private school , one of whom is in her final year . this measure is wrong , but it is especially reckless for those in exam years . we have heard a lot about the steps the prime minister took to ensure that his son could study peacefully , to give him the best chance in his gcses . why does he not want the same for all the other children in this country ? the measure is not only disruptive but potentially impossible . local to my constituency , stamford school offers a - level russian , lincoln minster school offers a - level chinese and oakham school offers the international baccalaureate . how could those children move into a state school that does not offer their course ? even if their course is offered , the timetable might not work . and even if the timetable works , the school might not teach the same periods and texts . for example , a student at nottingham girls ’ high school studying the russian revolution as part of the aqa history curriculum might have to move partway through the year to branston academy , which is teaching the tudors under the ocr curriculum . what should children taking such courses do ? should they change course , merely months or even weeks before their exams ? should they try to learn the material themselves ? should they resit a whole year of school ? will the government provide state schools with the extra resources to help those children complete their courses ? if they intend to do so , will those resources be ready and available to the state schools those children will be forced into for january 2025 ? i want to talk briefly about bursaries . i went to a state primary and a state secondary school . when i was a teenager hiking with my parents in the north york moors , i met a young lad who told me all about the cool , exciting school he went to , where they did a lot of outdoor stuff . i said , “ i would like to go there . that would be really cool . ” my parents said , “ that ’s far too expensive , caroline . we ca n’t do that . ” then i read about the scholarships they offered . i was very proud and pleased that gordonstoun school offered me the opportunity to study at the sixth form there — i will always be intensely grateful for that . the measures proposed by this government will reduce the amount of bursary support available to students like me , and those currently receiving bursaries , which enables them to get the education they wish for . schools will have to cut back . the most obvious areas in which to do that will be in their charity work , the extra teaching staff they offer to pupils in state schools and the facilities they make freely available to state schools . this is a short - sighted measure focused entirely on the politics of envy and division . last week i had a meeting with a group of incredibly dedicated and determined women in my constituency , all of whom have children with special educational needs . we discussed the broken send system and what it will take to fix it . i would like to share their top three points . first , the women said that when they chase for an assessment , diagnosis or school place , they are made to feel as if they and their children are a problem , when all they are doing is trying to ensure that their children get the same support and acceptance as any other child . one lady said she was treated like a criminal . this mentality towards send children and their parents has to change . secondly , these parents want their children to be able to go to their local state schools , in their community , but they feel that schools have a very limited understanding of their children ’s complex needs , let alone an ability to manage them . one mum told me about her child being excluded from school because their complex needs were treated like a behavioural problem . however , i know , for their part , that schools do not have enough staff or training to cope . thirdly , these mums are sick and tired of the lack of accountability in the system . schools are not being held to account for the way they manage and incorporate send children into school ; local authorities are not being held to account for their services ; and home - to - school transport providers are not being held to account for how they look after the children . the fact is that the support system for children with special educational needs and disabilities is broken . the answer lies in both funding and reform of the system . we have to make tough choices on where to find that funding — tough choices that the previous government ducked . rather than political point scoring , we owe it to all the send children and their parents , carers and teachers to work together and do everything in our power to fix this system as quickly as possible . from listening to contributions made by members from across the house , it is clear that these measures represent ideology over reality . the policy is economically illiterate , new consequences and implications are being discovered by the minute , and it will make worse every problem that government members say they perceive in the state system . they keep saying that they need to find more money to fill the black holes that they have magically found , yet the headlines show that they keep finding billions for pet projects every week . i was recently asked to go to a public meeting with over 100 concerned parents in my constituency . i listened to their stories and heard about their circumstances . from that evening alone , before we even got to this debate , it was clear that this policy was an ill - conceived disaster waiting to happen . some 1,800 children in fylde attend independent schools , hundreds of whom receive provision for send . schools , including aks lytham and kirkham grammar , as well as smaller , specialist independent schools , are major employers and have been at the heart of local communities for generations . the parents of the children at those schools are often not rich . they scrimp and scrape , take on extra jobs , miss holidays and do not buy new cars because they have made personal decisions about their children ’s education . every parent should have that right and should not face a tax on the education of their children . the idea that such parents are all just rich and can take the hit , or that the schools spend 20 % of their income on embossed stationery and swimming pools , is simply nonsense . this policy is fighting the class wars of the past with the future of the children of today . lancashire county council has already said it can not get close to meeting the forecast increase in places that will be needed , even before we get to the most acute send provision . this tax on education will not just hit independent schools , some of which are already facing closure ; it will hurt the state sector more — i say this as someone who was proudly educated at a state school . the policy is clearly the politics of envy done badly — so much for the supposed “ grown - ups ” being back in charge . for the record , my wife is a special educational needs co - ordinator in a local authority school and one of our children is in receipt of an ehcp . i have heard accounts from parents and seen at first hand the decisions local state schools have had to make to cut their budgets . teachers and staff have to subsidise classroom equipment , make cuts to the curriculum and mix year groups to reduce teacher numbers , which has an impact on children educated in the state sector in my constituency . conservative members would do better to spend their time understanding the real issues on the frontline and the impact that their decisions , made over the past 14 years , have had on my constituents in bexleyheath and crayford . the ofsted area send inspection of the bexley local area partnership last december found “ widespread and/or systemic failings leading to significant concerns about the experiences and outcomes of children and young people with special educational needs and/or disabilities ( send ) ” . the report concluded : “ overall , the voices of children and young people are not heard well in bexley . ” the task of fixing that lies with the bexley local area send inspection partnership and a range of partners , including our schools . at the same time , because of the pressures in our schools , bexley ’s conservative - controlled council found that the only way to stave off bankruptcy , due to its significant high needs block overspend , was to agree a safety valve agreement with the previous government . a report to bexley schools forum last week outlined that “ it will undoubtedly be very challenging to succeed in both delivering the mitigations already envisaged in the safety valve agreement ( the impact of which is assumed to accelerate in 2025/26 ) and also in identifying further realistic cost reductions to deal with the current level of overspend . ” it said that the deficit at the end of this financial year is “ expected to exceed the safety valve assumptions by £ 1.798 m. ” while this unholy mess has been unravelling , impacting the most vulnerable children in my constituency , i was shocked to see a return published in the electoral commission register . an independent school in my neighbouring constituency , but within my local authority area , made a financial donation to a local conservative association . i am afraid that that sums up the sorry state of where we are . while conservative members presided over 14 years in government , delivering a position where teachers and parent teacher associations are funding basic provision in our state schools , an independent school clearly does not find itself in that position , as it is able to donate part of its profits to the local conservative association . i was clear in my election campaign three months ago that i would support the policy to introduce vat on private schools . that is the mandate given to me across bexleyheath and crayford . for the reasons outlined , i will be opposing the motion today and supporting the government . my children have been educated in both the state and independent sectors . i spoke earlier in the westminster hall debate about how labour ’s plan to impose vat on independent schools is a tax on aspiration , but it is also something else : a lack of understanding of how to govern . the government ’s education tax is not just a lousy decision ; it is a lousy plan . as has already been said , imposing the vat in january — the middle of the school year — risks disrupting children ’s education and forcing mainstream schools to accept mid - year students . it denies parents time to prepare and does not allow independent schools time to register for vat . families of more than 5,000 pupils studying at independent schools in the london borough of bromley and my constituency must find up to £ 4,345 more per year to protect their children ’s education , or take the gruesome decision to remove their child from their friends and the school they enjoy , even at crucial moments such as gcse and a - level years . is that really what the government want ? one concerned parent told me that , with their children just two terms away from their gcses and a - levels , finding a local state school with the capacity to take them on and that is studying exactly the same exam boards would be impossible . in truth , the government have no idea how many pupils might leave . the institute for fiscal studies , which the government rely on , estimated that up to 40,000 people would leave independent schools , but it admits that there is too little evidence to be sure and that the situation is uncertain . in 2018 , the independent schools council estimated that , if this change were imposed , pupil numbers would drop by more than 134,000 over five years . whatever the number , it is a safe bet that this will be a slow burner , with some pupils forced out immediately , others leaving after exams , and those who will never enrol , resulting in years of uncertainty for schools , their staff , students and teachers , as many smaller schools will simply wither away . even a moderate number of exits threatens to close small independent schools . the likely result will be fewer pupils , fewer schools and more significant pressure on mainstream schools . this is a reckless recipe that will disrupt the education of pupils with special educational needs , pitch parents against councils and burden mainstream schools . when the labour party said that it would not tax working people , we had no idea that its targets were children and pensioners . this is ideological , not practical , and it will impact far more pupils than the government will admit to or recognise . let us be clear : in a few short weeks , when children up and down the country will be saying goodbye to their friends , when they will be struggling with the anxiety of being forced to go to a strange new school , and when , through no fault of their own , they will be suffering academic pressure in an exam year , it will be the result of government policy . as one headteacher said to me , this policy is nothing short of cruel . i am new to this place . indeed , until education is a charitable endeavour . the hon . gentleman was briefly the candidate in my constituency . given the result , it is rather a shame that he did not continue to be so . as i understand it , the opposition could have tabled a motion about anything for today . they could have tabled a motion about the crisis facing children in social care , slowly bankrupting local authorities such as mine . they could have tabled a motion about child poverty which results in 1,500 hartlepool children not having a bed to sleep in tonight . they could have talked about the scandal of children arriving at school hungry , the 10 % cut to our further education sector , the drop of a third in our apprenticeships , and the school cuts that have cost hartlepool schools £ 1.7 million in real terms since 2010 . but no , they chose to talk about this — the removal of a subsidy that the 93 % pay for the 7 % who want to send their children to private school . it is wrong and the myths attached to it are ridiculous . i do not have the time to go into the many things that i would like to say , but i want to finish on one simple point : i am sick and tired of hearing people talk as if the parents of aspiration and the parents who work hard are only those who want to send their children to private school . all parents aspire for their children , all parents work hard for their children , and we stand up for all parents and all children in this country . it is a pleasure to follow the hon . gentleman talks about allegations of vindictiveness and ideologically driven policies . they are coming not from those on the opposition benches , but from the hundreds of emails that we are getting from our constituents . our constituents are worried about how they will get their child into a state school , and the parents of children at state schools are worried about what is going to happen to the resources at their school when it has to cope with the influx of children from the independent sector . every year , 20 % to 30 % of children in edinburgh go into the independent sector . figures produced by the labour - led council just before the general election showed that , by the end of this decade , 16 schools will be over capacity , without any influx from the independent sector . we have problems in education , but this is not the solution to it . it is especially not the solution in scotland — i am not going to preach to members about english education . we have had 17 years of damage and mismanagement of our state sector in scotland from the scottish national party . to parents in scotland now , it just feels like the labour party is joining in . there is one big flaw in this : the minister said earlier that the money will go back into education , but parents in scotland would like to ask how . there is no mechanism . it is a reserved tax , and education is devolved . even if the government could come to some agreement with the snp , how will they ensure that places for the 9,000 children in edinburgh in independent schools are available in their catchment area ? how will they make sure that they will be studying the right subjects , and how will they do it by january ? it is just five months before they disrupt children ’s education . i have listened to lots of people here today say that every child ’s education is important — yes , it is . every parent has aspirations for their child — yes , they do . and every child deserves not to have their education disrupted with just five months to find a solution . that is not fair . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for giving me the opportunity to speak in this debate . i find it incredible that , after 14 years and an abysmal record on education , conservative members want a debate on education , but somehow i am not surprised . i often joked that , if they had the opportunity , they would blame teachers for the sinking of the titanic — although i was told that they had actually done so recently . as a former teacher , i saw the conservative government ’s abysmal record on education at first hand . in fact , i am standing here in this house because of it . when the former member for surrey heath declared that the majority of teachers were letting down the children that they teach , i saw red . i knew that only those people who donned the red rosette could fix the mess created by 14 years of ideological cuts . between 2010 and 2020 , spending per pupil in england fell by 9 % in real terms . one in eight schools were in deficit by the end of 2023 , and two out of three local authorities are struggling to find funding for send provision in their schools . in 2022 , 40 % of trainee teachers failed to qualify and left because of the unmanageably high workload . having recently spoken to several teachers in essex , i know the profound impact that 14 years of tory mismanagement has had on their mental health . but it is worse than that . in 2012 , essex county council first raised with the government the issue of raac in our schools , and the government said that there was no money to fix it . now , in 2024 , the failure to properly tackle this issue has been borne out . last week i visited jerounds primary school , one of the many brilliant primary schools in harlow , which is currently unable to provide hot food to its children because its kitchen is still closed due to raac . sir frederick gibberd school in harlow cost £ 29 million to build , and because of the failure of the last government is having to be pulled down . the education system is broken , and it is broken by tory design . labour has a plan to fix the education system , but it requires difficult decisions . removing the tax exemption on private schools is not the politics of envy , but it is a necessary action , which will generate between £ 1.3 billion and £ 1.5 billion for the uk government — to invest in our schools , to invest in our teachers , and to provide the people of harlow , of essex and across our country with the best possible education . i will take no lectures from the conservative party about education . let me reiterate to the minister the asks that the opposition have . in an ideal world we would prefer this policy not to go ahead , but the mathematics of this place indicate that whatever the government wish to do , they will secure . this change should be delayed until september 2025 ; that would allow for sensible planning . clearly , those with send and the children of serving military people or those in our diplomatic service should also be exempt . i would also like , on behalf of many of the schools in my constituency that have raised this , to know whether vat will be applicable to summer schools and other events that are put on . bryanston school in my constituency has a fantastic relationship with blandford high school . unlike the treasury minister who opened the debate , i have no skin in this game ; i was not privately educated , nor are my three children . but north dorset is not a particularly wealthy constituency . seven hundred and ninety - two jobs are linked to bryanston school . the soft power that the schools provide in the international environment also need to be taken into account . bryanston school alone makes a contribution of £ 24 million a year to the local north dorset economy . my asks are quite small in comparison to the ask that my labour opponent would have been making of the government had he won in july . because when richard jones , the head teacher of bryanston , at a church hustings , set out all the good work that bryanston does in the community , its contribution to the economy and the jobs that it creates , my opponent said he was fantastically interested , and would table an amendment to the legislation to secure an exemption for bryanston school . so if the labour front benchers could not even convince their own parliamentary candidate in north dorset of the merits of this policy , they have signally failed to convince the many parents and others who work very hard to send their children to school in the independent sector . my final words are for the secretary of state for education , after the terrible tweet that she put out a couple of days ago . she is the secretary of state for the education of all children , irrespective of which sector they are educated in . she used divisive words , referring to “ our children ” versus theirs . that is them and us . she has aided the government ’s case and argument not a jot . she is the secretary of state for the education of all children ; i wish she would take her responsibilities a wee bit more seriously . i welcome the opportunity to speak about what it means to have a government who will not just talk about opportunity , but take action to bring opportunity , aspiration and ambition to not just 7 % of the population but 100 % of our children and young people . like my hon . friends , i note that the opposition motion expresses the conservatives ’ “ regret ” over this policy . do they not regret 14 years of underfunding our state schools ? do they not regret slashing opportunity by shutting sure start centres lock , stock and barrel ? do they not regret growing child poverty on their watch ? do they not regret that more members on their benches have turned out today to defend tax exemptions than did to defend their record on the nhs last night ? i am proud to stand here today because this is a government who are putting ambition and opportunity front and centre in our missions . our principle — that everyone growing up in my constituency of southampton itchen should have the opportunity to get the best start in life , to do well , to be ambitious and to be supported to fulfil their dreams — should not simply be the preserve of children in independent schools . every parent wants the best for their children , whichever school they choose . i have had parents who have taken the decision to pay for private education for their children get in touch with very real concerns , which i acknowledge — that they are not all the super - rich , and that not all independent schools are like the etons and harrows of the world . but claims of an exodus from private schools to state schools are , i am afraid , completely unfounded . opposition members should be listening to the chief executive of the independent schools association , representing less prestigious , less expensive schools , who has talked about how many might benefit from a “ trading down ” , which means more students and more income to their schools . as my hon . friend i wonder , reading this tone - deaf motion from the opposition , what they would say to constituents in southampton , where many schools have had to ask for donations , and where the teachers they do not think deserved a pay rise have been struggling . we make this choice with no apology . i want to say from the outset that this is clearly an attack on aspiration , an attack on opportunity . i say to the constituents of the first point i want to make is about tone . i will come back to the education secretary ’s tweet , which was deeply offensive . surely labour members must acknowledge — it is a simple case of maths — that people who are rich enough to afford vat increases , whether it is 4 % , 16 % , which is the average , or the whole 20 % , will continue to send their kids to independent schools and pay the fees . it is the people who are struggling to make ends meet , or the really hard - up families , or — god forbid — parents of children who are on scholarships and bursaries who will no longer be able to send their kids to those schools , because those schools will have to withdraw those scholarships and bursaries as they will be less affordable . so the tone of this debate is really important . i would caution the government to be more reticent on this . they refer to tax breaks ; these are not tax breaks . education should not be , and is not , taxed , and they are about to open that pandora ’s box . there have been a lot of comments from government members about state schools . i agree : standards in state schools should be improved . they talk about the last 14 years . we delivered a real - terms increase per pupil . we have delivered record funding — about £ 60 billion . they may challenge that , but it is pure fact . i am happy to share those facts . we did that , and the result of that , especially with our focus on things like phonics , which labour challenged when in opposition , is that we now have some of the highest reading standards in the world — independently and internationally rated . we also have some of the highest ratings in mathematics . so the government may try to frame this debate as anything other than ideological , but those arguments are severely undermined by the education secretary ’s tweet , which put it out there that this is really a class war . my hon . friend is making a great point about how this change is ideologically motivated . can he see why there is a difference between private school fees , which the government have chosen to tax , and something like kip mcgrath tuition , which is also a paid - for form of education , which they have chosen not to tax — at least yet ? my hon . friend made an excellent speech about the practicalities of introducing this change in january , and she makes an excellent point now about the slippery slope involved . the government say that the money will be focused on educational improvements , but there is no guarantee of that , as it will go into the general pot . they promised 6,500 new teachers , which is fewer than we delivered ; it is a drop in the ocean , which will barely make a difference to the hundreds of thousands of schools that , of course , need extra teachers . i concede that point ; we should have better educational standards . send will affect every member of parliament . it affects me . i was with a north solihull parents group just a few weeks ago . those parents will no longer be able to afford to give their children a private education for send purposes , and they will now have to rely on the state . surely government members can see that that will further increase the burden on state provision , particularly if they are right that there is a lack of teachers . the minister might address this point : how does this policy improve state school provision ? how does it improve the standard and quality of delivery for send parents ? it was all right for the prime minister to make special provision for his kids , and for the education secretary to have a benefactor , but what are these parents going to do ? i am proud to have gone to calder high school in my constituency — the first purpose - built comprehensive school in the north of england . the history of that school and its teachers are fantastic , but the building is not . after years of under - investment in the capital programme and the shameful cancelling of building schools for the future , the building is crumbling . the same can be said for brooksbank school and todmorden high school , which are also in calder valley . all of them would have been scheduled for a rebuild sooner , had the government not cancelled building schools for the future . in the state sector , the problem is not just that the buildings are on their knees ; there is also the issue of everything inside the buildings . at the start of the previous government ’s austerity programme , we heard about teachers going without items , or buying them with their own money — glue sticks , books and so on . now when i talk to headteachers , they talk about going without teachers and support assistants , who are so vital for children ’s needs . we can judge a government , or indeed an opposition , by their priorities . frankly , the fact that the first opposition day debate on education focuses on the 7 % of students who go to private schools shows where this opposition ’s priorities are . if they had held a debate on send , i would have welcomed it , because send provision has been left in crisis . in calder valley , i can point to multiple examples of parents for whom advocating for their child has become a second job — and that is just those who have the resources to do so . ahead of this debate , i asked headteachers what their priorities for education would be . one , who did not want to be named , said : “ any therapeutic service is no longer easily accessible . no educational psychologists , no speech and language therapist access for the increasing number of pupils who ca n’t access the curriculum . ” we need to focus on the next generation in state schools — in all schools . that should be our priority . if i asked my constituents in calder valley what they think £ 1.5 billion should be spent on — that is the value of this tax break — it would not be the 7 % of children who go to private schools . i have a child at a private school . government members say that is not a problem . they say , “ this is not a criticism of private education ; this is merely a revenue - generation exercise , not social engineering or socialist class war . ” it must be a coincidence , then , that this policy punishes aspiration , pulls children down rather than lifting them up , and is being rushed through , as we have heard time and again . it is a socialist , red - meat policy to placate the labour back benchers who are having the gradual and terrifying realisation that they may well be single - term members of this place . the government need to think again . we have heard serious objections to this policy — not to its implementation , because the mathematics of this place mean that the government have sufficient support behind them to force anything through , however ill - advised , but we have heard serious recommendations for review , improvement and tweaking to undo some of the significant damage that this policy , unamended , will cause . introducing the policy on on the subject of pupils who are applying for education , health and care plans , 34 % of pupils at langley school in my constituency are treated for send , and only nine of them have ehcps . what do those other students do ? surely there should be a delay for pupils who are applying for ehcps . we have also heard from gallant members that military families are taking decisions now about their future in the armed services . there are also specialist schools for music and dance , which are important for the fabric of our community and the quality of life in this country ; those things are not offered in the state system . does this not further make the case for the government publishing in full their assessment of the impact that the measure will have on schools and children right across the country ? my right hon . friend is absolutely right . the government have published no evidence to support their stated objective . there has been no impact assessment . this measure is rushed , and vulnerable children are paying the price for internal labour politics . shame on you . fourteen years of tory neglect have left many of our schools on their knees . the situation is no better in scotland . after 17 years of the snp , scotland ’s once world - beating reputation for education has been tarnished . i regularly meet and hear from teachers whose passion and dedication is palpable , including mrs boyd and miss mckay , the primary 6 teachers at struthers primary school in troon . some 21 of their pupils have sent me individual letters asking me to join the fair trade campaign to “ be the change ” . however , over a quarter of children in north ayrshire now live in poverty . that means that 6,234 children are held back , even before the school day begins . conservative members have forgotten about the effects of austerity on constituencies such as mine . they and the snp are living in their own fantasies . having squandered reserves through financial incompetence , snp - run north ayrshire council faces £ 12.6 million of cuts in its upcoming budget . the situation has only been worsened by the council tax freeze imposed by the snp in holyrood . the council now proposes cutting 90 teaching posts between 2025 and 2027 , and removing a total of 230 hours of pupil support assistance , equivalent to eight full - time staff ; all school crossing patrols ; one full - time post from the music service ; and one full - time educational psychologist . that will be a travesty for children in north ayrshire , and casts further shame on the snp ’s education record in scotland . the independent institute for fiscal studies has said that this vat policy will raise more than £ 1 billion , and will see significant additional education spend in england , which means significant barnett consequentials for scotland , and for the young people in my constituency . today ’s generation of young people deserve no less , after suffering year after year of excuses . this government are not prepared to settle for more of the same . families and schools in my constituency are deeply concerned about this policy . they have contacted me to underline the pressure that it will put on them . many have already started applying for state school places . our independent schools reckon that about 5 % to 10 % of their students will move into the state sector . as we have heard , the measure will have a disproportionate impact on kids with send . in my constituency , roughly 8,000 children are educated in the independent sector . that means a lot of pressure on local state schools . a lot of kids who have their special educational needs met by independent schools are now applying for ehcps , which means extra pressure on assessments and provision . i support all my schools ; i am aspirational for all the children in my constituency . this policy , if enacted — as i expect it will be — will cause great harm . i would like the minister to be able to quote back data , analyses and stats to me , and to say , “ ben , you ’re wrong . do n’t worry your silly little head — it ’s all going to be fine , and here is the data to back it up . ” but he can not ; the data is not there because the government have not done the analysis . this debate has , sadly , been driven by ideology . about one in five children are educated at independent schools in my patch . i must declare that i have chosen independent education for my children . we will really suffer from this policy . the under - secretary of state for education , listening to the conservatives and the amount of fearmongering they do , one might think that a previous government had totally trashed the state sector ; i think that is quite obvious . as i said , schools in both the independent and state sectors are concerned about the policy and the sudden movement of children , in the middle of the year , into the state sector , which will struggle to find them places . those children may be studying for exams and have already experienced covid disruption , and the state schools that they move to might not have the right courses . i plead with the minister to look at the data and do the analysis to see if the policy will make money or lose it , and to consider the impact on children . i go back to the brutal , bitter words of the consultation document that went out this summer : “ the government understands that moving schools can be challenging . ” if i were a child going through my gcses or a - levels , and was forced to move into the state sector because of this policy — the analysis of which i can not see , because the government have not done it or will not publish it — and i read those words , i would say , “ please delay this policy . think again . look at it , and try to mitigate the impact on children with special educational needs , on armed forces families , and of disruption during the school year . please , if you are not going to stop it , at least delay it and do the working out . ” i congratulate the conservative party on calling this debate today , for the simple reason that it confirms what many of us already know : that the tories are much more focused on the 7 % of pupils in private school than they are on the 93 % in state education . given that the tory leadership contest is approaching its exciting climax , it is worth pointing out that state education has got barely a mention in that contest so far — i know it is a minority sport , but we expect better . in the last tory leadership contest , liz truss spent her time either criticising her own state school or criticising “ she will take no lectures in educational standards from an la - based , goldman sachs banker who went to a school for the uber - elite . ” meow , as my immediate predecessor in rochdale might say . david cameron famously went to eton ; indeed , it was michael gove who attacked the “ preposterous ” number of his fellow cabinet ministers who had been to eton . i am delighted to say that there are more labour mps who went to my own state school , oulder hill community school in rochdale , than went to eton — my hon . friend will the hon . member give way ? i am sorry , but i will not give way . i do not have much time . “ one rule for them , another for the rest of us , ” was the tory party ’s approach back then . now , their approach is , “ one school for them , another for the rest of us”—that is just as toxic a charge . the real problem is money . there was a 9 % fall in spending per pupil between 2010 and 2020 . worst of all , we have had 14 years of no overall growth in spending per pupil in our schools , a squeeze that the ifs said was “ without precedent in post - war uk history ” . turning back to the tory leadership contest , most of the contenders for that poisoned chalice have claimed that if elected , they will restore private school tax breaks . the fact that the tories plan to make another £ 1.3 billion - worth of cuts to state schools on top of their own record of austerity proves that they have not learned a thing from their catastrophic defeat at the last election . if they all put into state schools an ounce of the passion , the emotion and — yes — the hard cash they put into private schools , the public might start to listen to them again . the tragedy of this debate is the vitriolic negativity , when all of us could surely unite in our desire to improve the education of all . the government could have done something so different . they could have said to the independent sector , “ you ’re doing well , chaps . can you give us a bit of help ? can you work with us ? can you share more of your expertise , your wisdom , your success and your facilities ? in particular , can you help with regard to special educational needs , where the independent sector is doing so well at no cost to the taxpayer ? ” i think that would have gained universal enthusiasm and support . will the hon . member give way ? no , we are short of time . as a former governor of an independent school , i know that that approach would have been welcomed by the independent sector . instead , the choice that the government have made will do the opposite of what they intend . it is not going to raise anything like the funding they think it will : almost 100,000 children will leave the independent sector , many of whom have special educational needs , so it will earn almost nothing . i spoke earlier about the unintended consequences of this policy . a parent in my constituency has written to me . she has two children with special educational needs at private school , and she can not afford the vat , so they are going to go into the state system . the nearest place is an hour away , so now the local authority is going to pick up the cost of the taxi service of over £ 20,000 per child . those are the unintended real - world consequences of this choice by this government . most shamefully of all , because there is such a lack of capacity in so many areas and so many local authorities , that choice is going to result in bigger class sizes . that means more pressure on hard - pressed teachers in the state system , at a time when we are trying to ease that pressure . this choice is going to damage the education of many hundreds of thousands of children — exactly the opposite of what is intended . i say to the minister and his government that they could choose differently . they could pause this policy , work with the independent sector and gain much more universal support . instead , we have legal challenges going ahead . as i finish , i ask the minister to answer this simple question : if those legal challenges end up in the european court of human rights and it rules that the policy is unlawful , will his government comply with that ruling ? i call baggy shanker . thank you , madam deputy mayor—[interruption . ] i have done it again , have n’t i ? i am sorry , madam deputy speaker , but that is my local government background . education is the foundation upon which we build the future of our country . it opens doors , breaks down barriers and creates opportunity . yet today so many of our young people are being left behind by an education system that is struggling to meet their needs . labour is committed to changing that by driving high and rising standards in all areas in our state schools , ensuring that every child , no matter where they come from , has the same access to excellent education . when the tories left office — let us use the word “ left”—they also left behind a trail of devastation across our education system . schools were left crumbling , standards were left falling and they had the audacity to claim that they had “ maxed out ” on support for our children . we know that that could not be further from the truth . our state schools are in desperate need of investment , and that is why labour is making the tough political and fiscal choices necessary to prioritise our children ’s future . one of the toughest yet most significant steps we will take is to levy vat on private schools and end their business rates exemptions . by doing so , we will generate over £ 1.3 billion . that money will be reinvested directly into the state education system , benefiting the 93 % of children who attend state schools . it is time to put an end to a system that allows a privileged few to enjoy tax breaks while the majority of our children are left with lesser funded schools , and we know that is true . what will this investment achieve ? it will be used to recruit and retain thousands more teachers , ensuring that every child has access to the quality education that they deserve . we will reform ofsted , improve our schools , and provide early speech and language intervention for our youngest children . mental health counsellors will be placed in every secondary school , because we understand that a child ’s wellbeing is as important as their academic success . we will expand careers advice and work experience , giving students the skills and confidence to shape their own futures . we know that this works . we need look no further than my own constituency where , as leader of the council , i was proud to introduce the derby promise . the city of derby has made — order . i am going to call the front - bench speakers at 3.59 pm . that means that the remaining members are not all going to be called , unless they choose to make one - minute contributions , which i can not recommend to anyone . this is just to alert you that there will be some disappointment . i have come here today to speak on behalf of the children and young people in my bishop auckland constituency . i recently spent half a day at an independent school in my constituency , where i spoke with the students , and i have also hosted them here in parliament . i found them thoughtful and polite , and a credit to their parents and the school . i recognise the role that the school plays in my community . i think it is right that the school retains charitable status , which allows it to claim gift aid on donations and to reinvest surplus revenue without paying tax . i am fully committed to the school and to its fundraising efforts . that is because i want all children in my constituency , whether they attend state schools or fee - paying schools , to have the best opportunities to develop their talents and intellect , no matter their background . i wish i could say the same of conservative members , but their actions in government tell a different story . at a recent roundtable with primary school headteachers in my constituency , i heard stories of school dinner debts of £ 1,000 per school because they are having to feed hungry children . i heard of children coming into school with wet uniforms because there is no glass in their windows . one teacher talked about having to support children who had experienced horrific abuse but were not getting support through camhs . i also heard about children who arrive at school behind where they should be because of the closure of sure start . on social mobility , is it not the truth that the conservatives scrapped child trust funds ? under them , sure start centres were closed down , school playing fields were sold off and the education maintenance allowance was abolished . apprenticeships are down , youth services have been cut by 73 % since 2010 and there is a five - year waiting list for camhs . a decade has been lost because every school budget has less funding per pupil today than it had in 2010 . is that not the truth ? here is another truth—[interruption . ] opposition members do not like hearing it , but in the past 20 years , private school fees have increased by 55 % . i checked hansard to see whether we had a debate with them all expressing their concern for the state education sector and about the impact of that increase , but it turns out that when the increase is to make elite education even more elite , they are silent . i see no reason why private schools can not absorb the cost . the hon . gentleman talks about the elite , but does he understand the impact of the policy he is advocating , which is essentially that the elite , the rich , will still be able to afford independent education , while those who are making sacrifices to be there will be the ones who fall out , especially those with special educational needs ? i was coming on to that , and if anybody in an independent school is struggling to cut their cloth accordingly as the state sector has done , i could introduce them to headteachers in my constituency who have had to do that because of cuts imposed by the previous government . i also suggest that independent schools look at social tariffs and other ways to raise revenue . nobody wants to be doing this ; this is not about the politics of envy . conservative members have so far opposed every measure that we are taking to increase revenue or cut spending , and perhaps they need to realise that that is why they are on the opposition benches and we are on the government benches , as we try to fix state education , which is essential for our children . i join this debate as the son of educators — my mum , aunties , uncle , and grandad were all teachers in both the state and the private fee - earning sectors , and it definitely makes for interesting conversations round the dinner table . i also join the debate representing both state and fee - paying schools in my constituency , particularly the fantastic northampton high school , which is part of the girls ’ day school trust network and whose students i met in parliament recently . as a parliamentary candidate for nearly two years and since my election as the member of parliament for northampton south , i have spoken to countless constituents about our long - standing , well documented and consulted on plans to drive up standards in state education . do you want to know how many of those parents are actually going to move their kids into state schools once i have spoken to them , madam deputy speaker ? the answer is zero . it is right that the government focus on improving educational standards for those children left behind by the conservatives , who left a trail of devastation across education , from crumbling schools to a send sector in crisis . their legacy in education should see them hang their heads in shame . when hard - working teachers , teaching assistants and staff reached out , crying out for help , they did not listen . when the independent institute for fiscal studies said that this proposal will raise £ 1.3 billion for uk taxpayers , they did not listen . as my hon . friend will the hon . gentleman give way ? i will not — sorry . no one in this house wants to see the state education sector fail . i am sure no opposition member wants to deprive millions of students in the primary state education sector of the healthy nutritious breakfast that they will receive every morning , paid for through this policy . i am certain that all members on the opposition benches want dedicated mental health support in every school , paid for through this policy . i am almost certain that there are those on the opposition benches who want to vote with their conscience rather than the whip , so i urge members from all parties to vote against this political statement and to support the government that the country chose to break down barriers to opportunity . it is what our constituents want . it is an honour to follow citizen smith over there . in the large number of contributions today , we have seen the importance of this issue and the alarm felt by many members and their constituents about the government ’s proposal . i am sorry to say that we have also had a lot of 1970s politics of envy today . we believe in evidence - based decision making , and as many members have pointed out , it is becoming increasingly clear that labour ’s planned education taxes — removing vat and business rate exemptions from independent schools — will not do what is claimed . i will move on to the details in a moment , but may i first congratulate those who have delivered their maiden speeches today ? i thank them all for making gracious comments about their predecessors . i learned something about each of them today . i am afraid that i will not be so gracious about some other comments we have heard today from government members , who still do not seem to realise that they are now in government and their job is to talk the country up . they have constantly talked down not only the country , but the education system . let me remind them that when we left office , education standards were going up and per pupil funding was at record levels . in contrast , when labour was in office , we were falling in the league tables . what a brass neck labour members have , when we look at labour ’s record in wales . we have been backing our brilliant teachers , and i would hope that they would do the same . the motivations behind this policy are clearly questionable . the impact assessment is non - existent and the savings illusory . there are so many potential unintended consequences and uncertainties around these policies that , at the very least , the government need to postpone implementation , although it would be better to scrap the plans altogether . they are also moving away from a long - held principle that we used to agree on across the house that educational services are not taxed at all . it is a terrible thing that they are now bringing in . we have five key categories of concern : the impact on state schools ; the impact on government finances ; the timing of the proposals ; the consideration of exemptions ; and the impact on send and ehcps . i will not repeat all my comments from the debate we had earlier , but it is so clear that this policy will not only have a detrimental impact on the independent schools sector , but negatively impact the state sector , because the imposition of a 20 % vat hike overnight will mean that some families will no longer be able to afford the fees . inevitably that will mean children leaving the private sector and moving to the state system , putting an additional burden on many local state schools , some of which do not have the capacity . as i said this morning , it is not fearmongering or scaremongering ; it is happening already and we are already seeing it in schools . according to some forecasts , instead of the predicted £ 1.5 billion saving , this policy could cost the taxpayer money . how extraordinary to choose this policy area to try to eke out some cash when so many other options are available , if the government were brave enough . out of total government spending of more than £ 1.2 trillion , is this really the policy that they want to prioritise ? on the topic of overall government finances , we have not yet heard clearly whether the department for education will get more funding from the treasury if the number of state school pupils exceeds expectations . will they be expected to pay it out of existing budgets ? have the government set aside capital for additional school spaces if it is needed ? regarding the timing of the proposals , many members have mentioned that it is beyond belief that the government are bringing in this policy in the middle of the school year , when schools are simply not ready for it . it is not fair on the independent sector to expect schools to get their heads around new legislation , register for vat and implement new systems and processes in literally a matter of weeks and before christmas . that will not happen . we have also not heard whether the government will create exemptions or special considerations for all these areas : military families , students on music and dance schemes , children attending small schools , language schools or religious schools , those paying low fees or on bursaries , and children in exam years who may have to move to another school that does not offer their curriculum . what are the government doing about pupils with special educational needs and those with an ehcp or in the process of gaining one ? if , as many predict , there is a displacement of children with send and ehcps into the state sector , is there the capacity for that ? is there adequate additional funding support planned for local authorities to deal with that predicted increase in demand ? i wish to make a couple of other brief points before concluding . as a conservative , i believe in choice , and i will not criticise choices made by parents about their children ’s education . i have no qualms , however , about criticising hypocrisy . the irony that i stand here as a proud product of a state comprehensive education defending independent schools while the exchequer secretary to the treasury who spoke earlier , a product of a private education , is pursuing a policy that could undermine independent schools is not lost on me or others . many government members attended independent schools or sent or are sending their own children to them , and yet they are determined to increase the costs on others , depriving many families of the choice they themselves had . i am glad to see the secretary of state for education now in her place after being conspicuously absent . perhaps she will take the opportunity to apologise for the tweet . parents who send their children to independent schools pay twice for their children ’s education and deserve better than to be treated with contempt by their government ’s education secretary . the divisive tweet that she put out last weekend was shockingly ill - judged and ill - informed , sneering and smirking about embossed paper and swimming pools . does she really not understand or recognise that not every independent school is like eton or harrow ? it betrays an incredible lack of awareness and poor knowledge of the facilities and financial status of many independent schools . it demonstrated that the policy is being promoted not on evidence but on envy and spite — ill - informed and misplaced envy at that . i agree entirely with what my hon . friend has said . will he add to the indictment of the secretary of state the fact that she failed signally to realise that she is the secretary of state for all pupils , whether they are in the independent or the state sector ? the divisive language that she used was a very rude signal of two digits to those families who take a decision that she does not like . my hon . friend puts it well . i do not have to add to his comments . this is a rushed and ill - judged policy that will not raise the money the government assumed it would , undermine the viability of many independent schools , put immense pressure on the state school system and put in jeopardy the education prospects of thousands of students , including many with special needs . we implore ministers to reconsider . i thank the opposition for bringing forward the debate . while the focus has been on private schools and the implications of the planned tax changes , it has allowed us to consider what is important in education . it is important to support the aspirations of all young people and their parents , and it is essential that all young people receive a good education in a safe and supportive environment . it is certainly true that many parents choose to seek that provision in the private sector . the government will always support their right to choose where to educate their children , but most parents do not have that choice , and all parents have high aspirations for their children . we therefore need to prioritise our efforts and consider how we can better serve the 94 % of children in our state - funded schools . ending the tax breaks on vat and business rates for private schools is a necessary decision to drive high and rising standards across our state schools and give every young person the best start in life . it will generate additional funding to help improve public services , including the government ’s commitments relating to children and young people . this money will allow the government to expand early years childcare for all by opening 3,000 new nurseries , thus helping parents back to work . the government will recruit 6,500 new teachers and improve teacher and headteacher training as part of restoring teaching to the career of choice for the very best graduates . the treasury is of course responsible for tax policy and has led on the publication of the draft legislation and technical consultation since july . as the exchequer secretary set out , vat will apply to tuition and boarding fees charged by private schools for terms starting on or after will the minister give way ? i am going to make some progress . the right hon . gentleman spoke earlier . i know that many members are concerned about children with send . [ interruption . ] members can shout as much as they like , but i have some really important points to make about send . i know i speak for the country — the right hon . gentleman certainly does not . i assure members that the treasury has sought to ensure that these changes do not disadvantage pupils who need provision that is unavailable in the state sector . let me be clear : pupils who need a local authority - funded place in a private school , including those with a local authority - funded ehcp , will not be affected by the changes . that is because local authorities are able to reclaim vat when they are charged . for other pupils , this change should not mean that they will automatically face 20 % higher fees . the government expect private schools to take steps to minimise fee increases , including through reclaiming vat incurred in supplying education and boarding . i also note that ifs analysis shows that the number of children in private schools has remained steady despite a 20 % real - terms increase in average private school fees since 2020 and a 55 % rise since 2003 . members from both sides of the house mentioned transfers to the state - funded sector . there are always some pupils moving between the private and state - funded school sectors . approximately 50 maintained private schools close every year , for a range of reasons . where schools do close , pupils may transfer to another private school or move into the state sector . we simply do not accept , in the case of recent closures , that this has had any connection to our policy on vat . quite simply , the evidence does not bear that out . the number of pupils who might switch following these changes represents a very small proportion of overall pupil numbers in the state sector . any displacement is likely to take place over several years , and will mostly come from parents choosing not to place their children in the private sector to begin with , rather than children leaving the private sector . all children of compulsory school age are entitled to a state - funded school place if they need one . i understand that moving schools can be a challenging experience , and local authorities and schools already have processes to support pupils moving between schools . a number of members also raised concerns about capacity . there are always a range of pressures on state - funded school places , and the department for education works to support local authorities to ensure that every local area has sufficient places for children who need them . that is business as usual and local authorities and schools already have a range of options to increase capacity where it is needed . we are confident that the state sector will be able to accommodate any additional pupils and that there will not be a significant impact on state education as a whole . i congratulate my hon . friend in conclusion , this government were elected to deliver change across our country , not least in our schools . our mission to break down the barriers to opportunity is exactly what our country needs . this party is showing that education is once again at the forefront of national life . i urge members across the house to demonstrate that by voting against the motion . question put . the house proceeded to a division . will the serjeant at arms investigate the delay in the no lobby ? the house having divided : ayes 190 , noes 363 . question accordingly negatived . i beg to move , that this house recognises the real and immediate challenges faced by british farmers as a result of wet weather and rising costs ; notes the importance of food security as an essential component of national security in an increasingly uncertain world ; regrets that the £ 50 million extension of the farming recovery fund is yet to be paid out ; is concerned that reports suggest the farming budget is to be cut by £ 100 million ; calls on the government to confirm that the full £ 50 million of additional farming recovery fund support for those flooded , £ 75 million for internal drainage boards to protect agricultural land from floods and storms , and £ 220 million allocated to technology and productivity schemes announced earlier this year will be used in full and without delay , that no reduction to the farming budget will be made and that any underspends will be rolled forward as in previous years , and to keep farming and food production high on the agenda by committing to continue to host the annual farm to fork summit in downing street , continuing to publish the annual food security index , and appointing a tenant farming commissioner ; and further calls on the government to secure the long - term future of domestic food production by ensuring the best agricultural land is protected from inappropriate development , including large solar developments , by tackling rural crime , and by ensuring that the next generation can get into farming by protecting agricultural property relief . given the increasing uncertainty in the world , with covid , ukraine and now the middle east , food security is more important than ever and should be seen as a key part of our national security . britain ’s farmers face real and immediate challenges , which means that the government must take action now . that is why we have called this debate . between october 2022 and march 2024 , england experienced the most rain in any 18 - month period since records began in 1836 . in particular , storm babet and storm henk caused significant damage , leaving thousands of acres under water , and land saturated for prolonged periods . this has prevented many farmers from getting crops into the ground , and where they have been able to do so , their crops have been compromised . of course , farmers have done their best to respond , but recent research from the energy and climate intelligence unit and the agriculture and horticulture development board has suggested that england is heading for one of its worst harvests on record . the wheat harvest in england alone is estimated to be down more than 2.2 million tonnes , which represents an 18 % reduction since last year , and the total harvest for the five key crops — wheat , winter barley , spring barley , oats and oilseed rape — is set to be down by over 13 % , or 3 million tonnes , on the five - year average . we risk being increasingly reliant on imports , and unfortunately there seems to be no relief in sight ; 10 english counties experienced the wettest september on record , and input costs remain high . if we do not support our farmers now , many farm businesses say that they are unlikely to survive . as secretary of state , i prioritised food production . at the oxford farming conference , i announced more money , choice and trust for farmers . i increased rates paid under the sustainable farming incentive , and i announced in january that i was introducing new options to better reflect the range of farms . in the shadow secretary of state ’s time in office , why did he and the government of the day fail to get £ 300 million out of the door and into farms in constituencies such as mine ? i will come on to the underspends , because that is one of the key dividing lines between the two sides of the house . after we came out of the eu , i secured an agreement with the treasury that all the underspends from the new schemes would remain in the department for environment , food and rural affairs budget , for farmers and for defra . at the end of this month , in the budget , we will see whether the secretary of state has secured the same terms for any underspends . we know that the previous government made a whole raft of commitments that there was no way of paying for , so there is no credibility to the suggestion that the right hon . gentleman secured something from the discredited treasury that he was under . the key question is : if that money was so desperately needed , why was it not being spent ? as we came out of the european union , new schemes were set up , including the sfi , to support nature and farming . they represented a shift from the eu scheme , under which 50 % of the money went to 10 % of landowners . we were able to design new schemes . we listened to farmers , and that is why i announced at the farming conference an average increase of 10 % in payments , and 50 more choices to better reflect the variety of farms , including upland farms . we responded , but the point is that underspends all remained within the defra budget . the key question , which i am sure the secretary of state will come to , is whether he will give a similar commitment to the house that any underspends will remain in defra , given that we have just faced the wettest winter in 150 years , and given that in september , 10 counties had the worst rain on record . i would add one thing to what the shadow secretary of state is brilliantly saying : this is a matter for farmers in herefordshire as much as for those elsewhere . ross - on - wye , a rural town , was under water as a result of the floods . does he share my view that the whole ecosystem ultimately feeds into the river , and into river pollution , on which he took such a lead with the action plan ? does he share my hope that the plan will be supported by the new government , as well as by the river champion that he put in place ? i very much agree . my right hon . friend alludes to one of the key questions being asked by many farmers around the river wye : what has happened to the £ 35 million that was announced for farming support around the river wye ? again , there has been so little detail from this government , so i hope the secretary of state is able to give some reassurance to my right hon . friend . we also gave farmers other support . in february , we introduced the biggest package of productivity grants , in order to boost the deployment of the latest technology and enhance yields on farms . we improved protections to prevent the best land from being taken out of food production , including through the announcement in may on strengthening the guidance on solar farms . we responded positively to the national farmers union ’s request through the annual food security index , and we hosted the farm to fork summit in downing street . rose — i know that the clustering of solar farms on some of the best food production land in lincolnshire is a live issue ; i suspect that might be what my right hon . friend wants to address . i do not want to get into the debate for and against solar farms , but even those in favour of them should surely agree that we should not have a concentration of them—10,000 acres of them — around one town , namely gainsborough . should the secretary of state not consider such matters in the round , and take all the applications together ? the secretary of state should be doing that , but there is a marked difference between us . i persuaded the department for energy security and net zero to strengthen the guidance against solar farms , but the secretary of state is being pushed around by his cabinet colleagues . the energy secretary has already walked all over him , granting permission for a whole load of solar farms , and allowing the clustering that is causing such an issue . i will give the house an example of how the secretary of state is not championing farming . baroness rock was a true voice in the department for environment , food and rural affairs for tenant farmers , and she wrote the review of tenant farming that i commissioned in a previous role in no . 10 , but it seems that she has been sacked or asked to leave the defra board . it would be helpful if the secretary of state said why such a respected and talented figure had to leave her role . will my right hon . friend give way ? i will , and then i will make some progress . my right hon . friend is talking about the clustering of solar farms , but that is not the only problem . they are being built on high - quality agricultural land , which is nonsensical . it is , and a further concern in my constituency is that the consultants who do soil sampling for the developers are often felt to be interpreting and grading the quality of soil in a way that is not consistent with local knowledge . back in may , the previous government allocated £ 50 million of additional support to farmers hit by the wet weather . they extended the farming recovery fund to 1,000 more farmers , so that it covered all those affected in england . on top of that , in march , we announced the allocation of an additional £ 75 million to internal drainage boards , which are essential to protecting agricultural land from floods and storms . we now have a labour government who neither understand nor care for rural communities . [ hon . members : “ rubbish ! ” ] they were not so vocal when they launched their manifesto , which devoted just 87 words to farming . there was not a single mention of farming in the king ’s speech , because the government have made the active choice to de - prioritise british farming and food production . on the immediate challenge , the answer to a recent parliamentary question backs up what the sector is telling me . the £ 50 million of additional farming recovery fund support is yet to be paid out . we have just established that we have had the wettest weather for 150 years and that 10 counties have had particularly challenging weather , yet despite having a known scheme , with an extra £ 50 million , they have not allocated that much - needed , time - critical support . the secretary of state needs to explain why . the nfu says its members simply can not wait any longer for the support , yet labour seems to want to keep them waiting . reports suggest that the £ 75 million for the internal drainage boards is also on a go - slow , and we need to know why . for the longer term , labour ministers have overruled officials to cover some of the country ’s best farmland in solar panels . they have rejected the plans for binding food security targets . it has even been suggested in media reports that they plan to cut the farming budget by £ 100 million . indeed , it was reported that the nfu president has said that his members are being “ kept up at night ” by the “ cliff edge ” that labour ’s lack of commitment on the agriculture budget is causing . the government need to change course . they need to give immediate confidence to the sector and show that they care about food security . to do so , they need to commit to five things : first , that the full £ 50 million of additional wet weather support we announced in may will be paid out in full . as the first ever female director of the national farmers union in 100 years , i think i can speak with some credibility here . i represent tiverton and minehead , which includes the quantocks and exmoor . i have to say , you have some chutzpah — my farmers tell me that you sold them down the river . i say to government members that we need to work together on this , because our lot on the liberal democrat benches know more about farming than they do . order . i remind hon . members that if they use the word “ you ” , it means me . i would never suggest such things of you , madam deputy speaker . i could not quite spot the hon . lady ’s question — it seemed to be more of a statement . i am sure that farmers in tiverton , as well as those around the country , want to know why the £ 50 million that was allocated in may has not been given out . the lib dems may not care about that money , but conservative members want that support for farmers . secondly , the £ 75 million of support for internal drainage boards needs to be deployed in full and without delay . thirdly , the £ 220 million allocated for technology and productivity schemes needs to be honoured in full . fourthly , the government need to confirm there will be no cuts to the farming budget — an issue that is causing so much concern — so that we do not lose the £ 2.6 million that has been allocated for this year . fifthly , we need a commitment from the government that they will keep the farm to fork summit in downing street , they will have the food security index and they will appoint a tenant farming commissioner . looking further ahead , the government must do more to give farmers confidence . that means ruling out the removal or reduction of the agricultural property relief , better protecting farmland from schemes for solar and pylons , and ensuring that food production is central to the land use framework . only by doing those things can they show that they are backing our farmers and protecting food security , but sadly i fear an urbancentric government simply will not do that , not least with a labour secretary of state who is currently getting pushed around by his cabinet colleagues . it is only this conservative team who are , and will be , a voice for rural businesses , rural communities and our rural way of life , with improved farming production at its very heart . i welcome the opportunity to restate this government ’s support for farmers , who produce the food that feeds the nation and protect our beautiful countryside . farmers are the beating heart of rural communities across the country , promoting economic growth and stewarding our land . food security is national security in our increasingly unstable world . i am a little surprised that the conservatives called this debate , after they completely failed our farmers and undermined britain ’s food security . after 14 years of tory chaos , confidence among farmers is at a record low . more than 12,000 farmers and agri - businesses have been forced out of business since 2010 . the conservatives left a lack of infrastructure to protect farmers from extreme weather and no action at all to reduce soaring energy costs . this government will correct the mistakes of the past . can the secretary of state give me some comfort that the money that was allocated for the action plan for the river wye will be retained , even if not necessarily for the purposes that it was created for ? will he also reappoint the current champion for the river who has so far done excellent work ? i am grateful to the right hon . member for his intervention and for the representations that he has made to me personally on this issue . i know that he feels passionately about it and , indeed , it is a very important issue . i am afraid that we will need to wait until the conclusion of the spending review , which is normal practice in government , but his words have been heard and his concerns recognised . farming and food security are the foundations of our economy , our communities and , indeed , our environment . farmers were badly let down by the previous government who offered only sticking plasters to deal with the great challenges faced by british farming . this government will work with farmers to help them transition to new farming methods that are more sustainable both financially and environmentally . we will reduce the soaring energy prices that have hit so many food producers so hard . there will be no more dodgy trade deals that undermine british farmers . this will be a government on the side of britain ’s farmers . the secretary of state is right to say that farmers are a very important part of the community . his leader , the prime minister , said to the nfu last year that solar farms should not be created by taking advantage of tenant farmers . this is a live issue in my constituency and many others where tenant farmers will be deprived of their livelihood by new solar farms . will he stand by that commitment and say quite clearly to his cabinet colleagues that tenant farmers must not lose their livelihood by the creation of a solar farm ? i recognise the point the hon . gentleman is making and thank him for his intervention . i will comment later in my speech on further support that we would wish to offer tenant farmers . i do recognise the situation that they are in . on it is regrettable that this government inherited from the previous government flood defences in the worst condition ever recorded . of course i recognise that farmers need support , but they need long - term support , not just the sticking plaster approach that we had from the previous government . we will be looking at how we can do that . the environment agency has already made £ 37 million available , so support will be available to farmers that are facing flooding in the here and now . however , it is in the spending review that we will look at how we can provide that longer - term support so that we can give farmers and , indeed , other businesses and homeowners protection from the kind of severe weather events that we are seeing much more frequently due to climate change . while the secretary of state explains to the house what he is doing and what he will do , will he spare a thought for the farmers of northern ireland ? our agrifood industry is shaped and controlled not by the laws that this house makes , not by the laws that the devolved parliament makes , but by the laws made by a foreign parliament , namely the european parliament . in more than 300 areas of law , 120 of which affect our agrifood industry , that is how our laws are made . how is that even approaching being democratic and how is agrifood in northern ireland meant to be shaped to meet its needs if its own representatives can not even make or change the laws that govern it ? i am very pleased to say that i have already had two meetings with the northern ireland environment minister to talk about how we can co - operate better to support farmers in northern ireland . i have also been speaking with my right hon . friend the secretary of state for northern ireland , who shares that interest . farmers and families across my constituency were again hit by devastating flooding recently . does the secretary of state agree that the continual recurrence of these issues highlights the previous government ’s failure for far too long to take flooding seriously ? can he reassure farmers and families right across my rural community that he will take all the action needed not only to mount a co - ordinated , multi - agency response in the aftermath of flooding , but to ensure proper mitigation in the long term ? i had the pleasure of visiting my hon . friend ’s constituency and a farm there during the election campaign , and i thoroughly recognise the point that he raises . it is a little hypocritical , is it not , for the conservative party to complain that not enough is being done on flooding , when their government left flood defences in the worst condition ever recorded ? rose — i will now make a little progress . i have taken quite a few interventions , and other members want to speak . our new deal for farmers will boost britain ’s food security , protect our environment and drive rural economic growth by tackling the root causes of the long - term issues they face — climate change , rising prices for energy , feed and fertiliser , unfair supply chains , and access to labour . we will ensure that environmental land management schemes work for farmers , and where funding is allocated for farmers we will make sure it reaches farmers , ending the tory underspends that saw hundreds of millions of pounds held back . we will improve these schemes by working with farmers to boost food security and promote nature ’s recovery , including upland , lowland , grass and tenant farmers . upland farmers have been left behind . farmers in the uplands have been losing their basic payments each year , but have not been able to access new schemes . we have arrived in office to find no credible plan to address that , leaving thousands of the most remote and isolated farmers without a clear path for their families , businesses or communities . we need a fair approach for all farmers . we all understand that my right hon . friend has inherited in his department a panoply of different crises , from the crisis facing our farmers to flooding . he is absolutely right that trying to get the environmental land management scheme to achieve what was originally intended for it is one of the biggest issues facing britain ’s farmers . i appreciate it is very early days , but what is his sense of what the major failures are right now , and what might we look forward to in his plan to sort them out ? the environmental land management schemes are taking the right approach , but they need to work better for all farmers . too many farmers feel that they can not access them or do not get the support that they need . my proposal is not that the government will dictate to farmers how those changes should happen , but that we should work with farmers , in a partnership , to hear their voices and allow them to influence changes to those schemes that will make them more effective in achieving the many outcomes that we seek to get from that government funding . we will not tell farmers how to farm . we will achieve this by working together with them in that new partnership . i recently met the tenant farmers association to hear its views about improving support for tenant farmers . i agree that the proposal for a tenant farming commissioner has merit , and we will make an announcement shortly . our new deal will protect farmers from being undercut in trade deals . the conservative government ’s trade deal with australia and new zealand is a disaster for our british farmers . they were sold down the river , as the conservative party allowed the import of food produced to standards so low that they would be unacceptable in this country . instead of backing british farmers , the conservatives undermined british farmers . we want to see more support for british farmers — more opportunities for british farmers , not fewer . we have already delivered early first steps for british farmers , securing access to the us market for uk beetroot growers and to the south african market for poultry producers . instead of the botched tory brexit deal that threw up barriers to trade and blocked great british food exports , we will seek a new veterinary agreement with the eu , to tear those barriers down and get our food exports moving again , putting money straight into the pockets of british farmers . i am grateful to the secretary of state for giving way a second time . he talks about the importance to communities of farmers , particularly intergenerational farmers . we understand that consideration is being given to withdrawing agricultural property relief in the budget at the end of october . will he confirm that that will not happen ? if it did , it would be the end of intergenerational farming in this country . i understand the hon . member ’s point and the importance of intergenerational farming , but he will understand that i can not anticipate the outcome of the budget process . does the secretary of state agree with me about the urgency of a sanitary and phytosanitary deal and , probably , of rejoining the pan - euro - mediterranean convention , because of the damage being done to british farmers by brexit border taxes ? the national farmers union tried to warn the shadow secretary of state that farmers were facing an “ existential threat ” because they can not import the seeds they need — tomato seeds , pepper seeds and oil seed rape . we now hear from ports that very few checks are being done , making a mockery of the idea of any food security . does my right hon . friend agree that when the shadow secretary of state makes lists of what could happen , apologising for the mess they made at the border should be at the top ? as always , my hon . friend makes an important point very eloquently . during the election campaign , i spoke to farmers up and down the country — as i did before that and have done since — who were absolutely furious that , having been promised continued access to the european markets where they were selling their great , high - quality british produce , they were instead taking a financial hit as trade barriers were thrown up and they could no longer sell into those markets . we want to correct that by seeking a new veterinary deal with the european union to get exports moving across the borders again . we will not allow food producers to continue to bear the brunt of unfair supply chains . farmers deserve a fair price for the food they produce , and we will bring forward proposals to make sure that happens . one of the biggest cost rises affecting british farmers has been energy bills . we will prevent future price shocks by switching on gb energy , so we can harness the power of wind , wave , solar and nuclear energy to keep bills down and take back control of our own energy supplies from foreign fossil - fuel dictators like vladimir putin . the secretary of state talks about the importance of cheap energy , solar and food security . clearly , land needs a balance . what representations has he made to the energy secretary to be clear that the best farmland should not be used for ground - mounted solar ? the hon . lady has made that point to me before , and i reassure her that , even at their most ambitious extent , solar farms would not cover more than 1 % of agricultural land . for farmers , climate change is also a significant concern . the reason we are seeing such heavy rainfall is climate change : that is what is leading to the flooding and droughts that are damaging farmers . if we do not take action to transition to a clean energy economy , farmers will continue to suffer from things that none of us wish them to have to deal with . as a dairy farmer and a tenant farmer , i perhaps have unique experience in this matter . obviously i am welsh as well , and i realise that agricultural policy is devolved to wales . this issue involves the aftermath of brexit . under the eu common agricultural policy , wales received around 9.5 % of the total uk cap budget , which was based on our rural lifestyle in wales and farming criteria such as the size , number and nature of farms . if allocations are calculated using the barnett formula and population figures instead , we would have only 5.6 % of the total agricultural budget . order . can i remind the hon . lady that interventions need to be short ? sorry — i am very new and i apologise . can the secretary of state guarantee that wales will not miss out on any increases in the uk funding settlement for agriculture and rural development due to the reduced allocation ? i thank the hon . lady for her intervention and can reassure her that i have had multiple conversations with the welsh deputy first minister , who is also the environment minister in wales , to ensure that those concerns are heard as we go through the spending review process . it is always difficult in the couple of weeks running up to the budget , because i can not give definitive answers , as she will understand , but that will become clear once the chancellor has made her statement towards the end of the month . we will use the government ’s purchasing power to buy more british produce for our hospitals and prisons — again , putting money directly into the pockets of british farmers . crime was another issue that was running out of control under the conservatives — and no wonder , after they took so many police off our streets . crime in rural areas has skyrocketed by almost a third since 2011 . our new deal for farmers will see the first ever cross - government rural crime strategy to crack down on antisocial behaviour , fly - tipping and gps theft — issues that have repeatedly been raised with me by farmers and people living in rural communities . will the secretary of state give way on that point ? if the hon . gentleman will allow me , i will make a little progress . i have taken up an awful lot of time and am only about halfway through , and i want to leave time for others to speak . it should be of huge concern to every one of us that the suicide rate among male farmers is three times the national average , and the highest among any sector in the economy . i take this opportunity to pay tribute to mental health charity the royal agricultural benevolent institution for its excellent work in tackling that alarming and unacceptable situation . we will tackle the mental health crisis in our rural communities by recruiting 8,500 more mental health professionals across the nhs and setting up a young futures mental health hub for under-25s in every rural community . after fewer than 100 days in office , i chaired the first meeting of the new flood resilience taskforce . funding allocated to flood defences had been left unspent for years , but we will speed up the construction of flood defences , drainage systems and natural flood schemes so that we can offer farmers and rural communities better protection from extreme weather in the long term . members are aware that the government are currently conducting a spending review to fix the foundations of our economy after the previous government crashed it and left behind a staggering £ 22 billion black hole in the public finances—[interruption . ] what they did is not funny ; the problems that it has caused british farmers , and people living in our rural communities , are not funny . i think the conservatives should show a little more humility after what they did . while that process is live , there is little that i can say on individual spending areas . i can say , however , that we recognise the challenges caused by the wet weather earlier in the year and in recent years . that is just one challenge among many for farmers right now . a few weeks ago , i met a farmer in essex who has a case of bluetongue in his herd . i am grateful to farmers for complying with movement restrictions intended to stop the spread of that disease . we will confirm plans for the farming recovery fund , investment in internal drainage boards and other grants as we complete the budget process . we will also work with farmers to reduce agricultural water pollution from run - off , and to look at ways of improving their nutrient management and the effectiveness of regulations . boosting productivity in farming is hugely important . grants and direct investment are part of achieving that , but we need to think bigger and look for more enduring solutions . the conservatives sold farmers out , undercutting them with dodgy trade deals with new zealand and australia . to return to my right hon . friend ’s previous point , this government have secured for uk beetroot growers access to the us market worth approximately £ 100,000 per year in increased exports . does he agree that the contrast in trade agreements could not be starker ? in trade deals , labour protects farmers ; the conservatives sell them down the river . i happily agree with the points that my hon . friend has made . the labour party is on the side of farmers . the uk has world - class science and innovation capabilities . developing new technologies and techniques for use by farmers and growers will be critical for our food security , for business resilience to climate change , and for promoting economic growth . we have set up a new british infrastructure council to steer private investment in rural areas , including in broadband roll - out across rural communities and in electricity grids to power our growth . we are reforming the apprenticeship levy to improve rural apprenticeships and skills and give farmers the freedom and flexibility to upskill their workforce , and are opening specialist technical excellence colleges to match skills to local economies . a few weeks ago , the minister responsible for farming and food security , my hon . friend food security is national security , and of course , energy security is also national security . this government will deliver the mandate we were elected on . our plans to boost solar power do not risk the uk ’s food security : even in the most ambitious scenarios , less than 1 % of the uk ’s agricultural land would be used for solar . more broadly , there are challenges and trade - offs . land is finite , but the pressures we put upon it are increasing . rose — i will finish my speech , if members do not mind . that is why this government will do what the previous government failed to achieve , despite repeated promises . we will publish a land use framework , providing more clarity and starting a conversation on land use and how we can maintain food production , restore nature and grow the economy . farmers do a fantastic job for our country . they produce the food we eat and steward our beautiful countryside , and they deserve our support , but the previous government let them down . our new deal for farming will offer farmers a fresh start — action to cut energy bills , action on rural crime , action to open markets to trade and export , and action to cut the appalling levels of mental ill health that affect farmers right across our country . i welcome this debate and the chance to restate this government ’s support for farmers . after 14 years of failure , change has begun . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . it is an honour to take part in this debate and to speak not just on behalf of my party , but as the member of parliament for farmers from the cartmel peninsula to the eden valley , the yorkshire dales , the westmorland dales and the lake district — for 1,500 wonderful farmers throughout the length and breadth of westmorland and lonsdale . i am humbled and utterly privileged to be their mp . i am here primarily not to say how great the liberal democrats are — i am sure that is self - evident — but to state how utterly , unspeakably valuable farmers and farming are . they are valuable for producing the food that we all eat ; if members have eaten anything today , they should thank a farmer . they are utterly valuable in our fight against climate change . they are on the frontline tackling that threat , and are our best answer to the nature and biodiversity crisis that we have in our land . they are the people who protect the towns and villages near the countryside from the expensive and heartbreaking horrors of flooding , and who support and protect our heritage and — in my constituency in particular — underpin our remarkable tourism economy . across the country , tourism and hospitality is our fourth biggest employer , but in cumbria , that sector is our biggest employer . some 60,000 people work within the industry ; it is a £ 4.5 billion economy . undoubtedly , farming is the backbone , the backdrop and the underpinning of that wonderful and important tourism and hospitality economy . farmers need to hear that , and they need to hear that they are valued by this place and by this country , because they do not feel that . they feel beleaguered . yes , beleaguered by things that are beyond our control — the weather , or the global shocks that are undoubtedly causing huge pressure on farmers — but also deeply beleaguered by public and government policy . we have an agriculture policy minted by the previous conservative government and , for the time being at least , maintained by this labour government , that is based on — this is the maddest thing i have heard myself say in this place , and i have said some mad things — disincentivising the production of food . can we believe that that is literally the case ? it is a policy created by the conservative party and that , for the time being at least , is being maintained by the party currently in power . the consequence is that only 55 % of the food we eat in this country is produced in this country . i have talked to adam day from the cumbria farmer network , and he has been reported in the farmers guardian , so this is an absolutely legitimate figure : we have a year - on - year reduction in the number of sheep in this country of 4.2 % . if we destock the fells of animals , we will soon after destock the countryside of human beings . it is a deep threat to our ability to feed ourselves . i am following the hon . gentleman ’s remarks with a great deal of interest . does he agree that the vast majority of people in this country , given the choice , would rather buy british food ? certainly , all the surveys that have been done would bear that out . however , one of the principal problems is the information they are provided with by the supermarkets and , i am afraid , the cynical way in which many of those supermarkets approach the labelling of food , suggesting it is british when in fact it is not . what does he suggest we do to give consumers , who have not yet been mentioned in this debate , the genuine choice they are seeking and to help our farmers along the way ? the right hon . member is absolutely right . i support the nfu ’s call for accurate labelling that is enforceable , and he is right to say that . to move on , if we are losing farms and losing farmers , which we are as we speak , not only are we losing our ability to feed ourselves as a country , but we are undermining our ability to deliver for the environment . let us not fall into the mistake of thinking that this is a debate between caring for the environment and producing food ; we either do them both or we do not do them at all . some 70 % of england ’s land mass is agricultural , and the figure would be greater across the uk as a whole . if we think we are tackling the climate and nature crises without farmers , we are kidding ourselves . the greenest policies in the world will just be bits of paper in a drawer if we do not have the farmers on the ground to put them into practice . farmers in frome and east somerset , like many farmers , work tirelessly to produce food for our country . however , does my hon . friend agree that it is vital to acknowledge the role they also play in restoring nature and mitigating the effects of climate change , and that the government need to support farmers to develop natural climate solutions to restore nature ? i completely agree with that , and it leads me on to what i was going to say next , which is to praise michael gove . the environmental land management scheme created at the beginning of the last parliament has an awful lot going for it , and there is actually cross - party support for the idea of public money for public goods , as my hon . friend rightly points out . i will say this : we have searched high and low for brexit benefits , and this might be one of them . the common agricultural policy was riddled with all sorts of failures , some of which have been mentioned already . elms provide the possibility to have a bespoke farming and cultural environment policy that actually delivers what we want in the places where we want it , and providing environmental goods is absolutely part of that . however , this positive idea with all - party support was botched by the last administration . there was a £ 2.4 billion budget for england alone — eroded , of course , over five years by inflation and all the shocks we have talked about — yet even that pitiful budget , which was frozen by the last government , was underspent by £ 358 million . what does that mean ? it reduces our ability to feed ourselves as country , to restore nature and to tackle climate change . we did not spend the money not because farmers did not need it , but because of a surplus of complacency from a conservative party that thought the countryside would always vote for it , because of a lack of care for farmers , their families and their communities , and from a fundamental absence of competence . my message to the secretary of state , the treasury , the prime minister , and every labour mp is this : please do not let the treasury take financial advantage of tory incompetence . do not bake in the underspend . please , secretary of state , do not give in to no.11 and no.10 . protect this budget , because without that public money we will not get those public goods . please fight your corner—[interruption . ] i am pleased to hear him say that he will do so . in fighting his corner , he will be fighting the countryside ’s corner , and i want to support him in that . i would like the labour party to understand why the conservatives botched the transition and why the money did not get spent . one of the few efficient things that the previous administration did was to get rid of the basic payment on time and without any delay . that happened without any problems whatsoever . what did not happen at the same time was the adequate rolling out of new elms payments , in particular the sustainable farming incentive . we had a stop - start approach , and many people on historic stewardship schemes for example , were simply not able to get into the sfi . at the westmorland county show a few weeks ago i spoke to a youngish hill farmer in his 40s — i mention this particular case because it is so typical of all the others i have spoken about in my constituency and beyond . he said to me that by the end of the process he will have lost £ 40,000 in basic payments from his annual income . he will gain £ 14,000 in sfi , and by the way that cost him £ 6,000 in agent fees . that is a net loss every year of £ 26,000 , and that is typical . that is why there is an underspend . please do not bake it in . the secretary of state rightly spoke about mental health , and in this time of flux and change i have never worried more about the mental health of my constituents , and of farmers in particular . the suicide rate among male farmers is three times the national average . the conservative party left rural communities such as mine facing a mental health crisis . a close family friend of mine , rocky poulson , took his own life just four days after a farm inspection found that 18 of his sheep were tagged with the wrong coloured ear tags , leaving him facing criminal sanctions and the embarrassment of that among his friends and colleagues — order . may i respectfully suggest to the hon . lady , and all members — she should be sitting if i am standing — that interventions should be short , they should be spontaneous , and they certainly should not be read out as if they were part of a speech . i am sure the hon . lady has made her point . she really has , and i completely sympathise with her and those around her over the loss of her friend . the hon . gentleman makes an important point about young famers and mental health , and i know there is a brilliant project in his patch called growing well . does he agree that the young farmers of this generation are very different from those who i grew up with , who were very much chemical farmers post - war ? this generation believes in habitat and conservation , and all they ask for through elms is a strategic framework by which they can grow their businesses in the long term . that is the best security we can give them . i agree with that , and i thank the hon . gentleman for raising growing well at sizergh and tebay , and the fantastic job it does in building mental health and connecting that with the countryside . i particularly want people who are not from rural constituencies to imagine what it is like in this time of flux and change , when people see the money going out the door and do not see it coming in . typically , farmers are male . they will be my age or even older than me , and they will be perhaps the fifth , sixth or seventh generation who have farmed that farmstead . they see the very real prospect of being the one who loses the family farm . what does that do to someone ’s head ? we have heard the horrific consequences , and we need to love , cherish and care for our farmers , and recognise the terrible situation they are in at this moment of flux . as a past president of the young farmers ’ clubs of ulster i think the hon . gentleman ’s point is very apt . at this moment across the uk , 95 % of farmers under 40 say that mental health is their biggest concern . it is not only about losing the family farm ; it is about worrying where the next payment comes from . it is about relying on making that payment and about what they do for the next generation and the ones before and after . mental health is a real problem , and i am disappointed that the secretary of state did not go into any great detail on that issue . hopefully we have established that we need to care for those who feed us and care for our environment . farmers need friends , so let me mention one potential very important friend : the prime minister . people may be aware that during the general election , the prime minister turned up in my constituency . i have the claim to fame that mine is the only constituency in the entire united kingdom where labour lost its deposit — by the way , my labour opponent pippa was excellent , and it was nothing to do with her — but the prime minister came to the langdale valley in my constituency . despite the fact that i am a blackburn rovers fan , i was pleased to see gary neville there . people will remember the party political broadcast that labour had during the election campaign , as well as the prime minister ’s recent speech at the labour conference , where he talked about the importance of the langdale valley to him personally growing up and to the development of who he is . i was moved by that . as the member of parliament for the langdale valley , i am grateful to him for saying that . langdale needs friends , and this is a moment where langdale could do with the most important of friends , particularly when it comes to spending money . i will read out some words from a hill farmer related to the prime minister ’s comments about his upbringing in the langdale valley . he said that he was “ moved ” that the prime minister championed langdale so well , but he then said that “ farming communities in langdale and other upland areas are facing severe financial hardship with many wondering whether they will survive … they have now lost 50 % or more of the basic payment scheme , an integral part of their business income , which will actually all be gone soon . these farmers are almost all in old environmental stewardship schemes , which means that they are hardly able to access anything from the new elms scheme and the sustainable farming incentive . not because they do n’t want to , but because of computer and agency issues in defra . ” if the prime minister loves langdale , will he please prove it by ensuring that we invest in hill farmers and in farming more generally ? we have focused on what the last government got wrong . will the hon . gentleman give way ? i happily give way to my neighbour . i thank the hon . member for allowing me to intervene . i am a fellow cumbrian mp and i grew up in the lake district , so i was pleased to see the prime minister ’s story of an area that i know and love as well . does the hon . member agree that while the shadow secretary of state ’s introduction to this debate challenged us over our budget , the real issue that i hear from farmers in cumbria is that it is one thing to have a budget , but if we can not get it out the door , it is pretty meaningless ? does he agree that that is the real challenge ? that is the real challenge , so we need to ensure that there is more money in the budget for welfare schemes and support to ensure that farmers can carry on farming . if we are taking the basic payment out relentlessly without anything to replace it , the government should not be surprised if there is carnage . that is not just personal carnage and tragedies , but also a reduction in our ability to feed ourselves as a country . let us concentrate for a moment or two , before i shut up , on what we can do to put things right . first , the liberal democrats believe wholeheartedly , as in our costed manifesto , that there should be an additional billion pounds in the budget . we recognise that we can not restore nature , tackle climate change or produce food on the cheap . we want to use at least some of that money to invest in trusted on - farm advice . a conservative member earlier made the point about how much of the eu money went to big landowners , but the problem is that the current situation is even worse . who is not getting in ? it is smaller farmers . if someone is working 90 hours a week on their farm , they do not have time to go and get informed and to engage in the process outside . they need someone they trust on their farm to hold their hand through the process of getting into this new world , so that there is a future for them and for their family . that is where some of that money needs to go . we need to recognise that much of the money has disproportionately gone to big landowners , both public and private . the bbc reported , and i know this to be true , that one landowner alone evicted 65 tenants from one estate in in april 2024 , giving people notice to quit that estate . the distribution of money between the richer farmers and the poorer is even worse than it was under the common agricultural policy , and we never thought that would even be possible . but we are seeing what i would describe , in no way lightly , as the lakeland clearances , and as we lose livestock , we lose people . i want to say something else positive . i have already mentioned at least one conservative positively ; baroness rock also did a tremendous job with the tenant farming review . the shadow secretary of state ’s predecessor did not meet her in all her time in her position . i am concerned to learn that baroness rock got the sack — whatever happened , she has been removed from her role — as the report is hugely important . tenants need protecting , and there must be a tenant farm commissioner . i urge the government to take on baroness rock ’s report and recommendations in full , without any mitigation or equivocation . the government could also ensure that people in stewardship schemes are allowed into the sfi . let us ensure that farming in protected landscapes , which is a really important grant scheme , is renewed ; its current end date is the end of march . let us also do something fundamentally radical but blindingly obvious : let us make food a public good . let us ensure that our agricultural policy actually encourages people to produce food . this issue is not just about transition — people have talked about the trade deals ; the conservative government threw britain ’s farmers under the bus when it came to them . there is also the lack of access to our nearest markets , which some labour members have mentioned , and the importance of restoring and normalising relationships with our biggest export market over the channel . for a generation , the conservatives will carry around their neck , like an albatross , their record of betraying and taking for granted our rural communities in general , and farmers in particular . does the hon . member agree that one of the elements of that betrayal was on rural crime , which increased , again , in the last 12 months ? will he join me in congratulating cumbria ’s rural crime team on their one - year anniversary , and in supporting the government ’s commitment , finally , to reversing the disgraceful rise in rural crime that we saw under the last government ? yes . order . before the hon . gentleman resumes his remarks , i point out that the front benchers have used about 20 minutes each . i am sure that he is coming to a close . i have been generous in giving way , and you have been even more generous , madam deputy speaker . a minute and i am done . i agree with the conservatives ’ betrayal will rightly weigh around their neck for a generation — farmers have long memories — but if labour bakes the conservatives ’ failure into its spending plans , it will hang out to dry not only britain ’s farmers , but its newly elected members of parliament . rural communities need champions ; liberal democrats will be those champions . we will make a conscious choice to step into the void ; that is what rural communities need . we will be the voice for farmers , and for the whole of our countryside . we value our farmers ; every day , on their job list is feeding the country and saving the planet . what a mission ! it is our duty and our privilege to support them in that mission . rose — before i call the next speaker , i should say that the front - bench speakers have used up a significant amount of time , aided and abetted , i have to say , by excessively long interventions , some of which were made by members who did not hang around long in the chamber after making them . it is a courtesy to the chair , and to the front - bench speakers , that members who wish to contribute to a debate be here for the start of it . those who were not here then will not get called , because we have very little time left . i call john whitby to make his maiden speech . madam deputy speaker , it is a genuine honour to address you and the house today . it is not just a privilege to represent the derbyshire dales ; it is a privilege just to be there , because it is truly an area of outstanding natural beauty — known to many hon . members , i am sure , because it is a destination for millions . but its great appeal also presents a problem , particularly for younger people who are looking for housing . the little house building that takes place is more or less matched by the number of properties lost to second homes , holiday lets and airbnbs . that results in the highest house prices in the region , which puts houses out of the reach of many young people ; they end up moving to other areas to find more affordable housing . that in turn means fewer young families , fewer children , and schools with falling numbers on roll . small businesses , including farms , pubs and restaurants , suffer as well , as they struggle to get staff due to the lack of affordable accommodation nearby . it is vital that we address this housing crisis . i pay tribute to my predecessor , sarah dines , who stood up for the farming community in the dales — something that i very much hope to continue . i have had the pleasure of meeting her predecessor , lord patrick mcloughlin , who is in the other place , and i hope to benefit from his vast experience of the constituency . the main industries in the dales are , unsurprisingly , tourism , leisure and hospitality , quarrying and agriculture . i am hopeful that the new government can secure a veterinary agreement with the european union to give our struggling farmers a boost . i have spent much of my first few weeks in the role speaking to farmers to try to understand what the key issues are for them . food security in an increasingly unstable world must be a high priority . the dales have great historical significance . according to the anglo - saxon chronicles , in the 10th century , the northern kings met edward the elder at the bakewell burh and chose him as father and lord , effectively creating the entity that we call england . arkwright ’s mill at cromford is the birthplace of mass production , and of course it was powered by renewable energy . i recently met the arkwright society , which is restoring the site for the benefit of future generations and doing a great job . i also recently met jamie needle , who has taken on masson mill , another of arkwright ’s mills . he is also concerned with the delivery of hydroelectric power from the derwent — what goes around comes around . stone from derbyshire quarries was used in the reconstruction of parliament in the 19th century , and the founder of modern nursing , florence nightingale , lived in the constituency , at the family residence at lea hurst . she said : “ nursing is a progressive art such that to stand still is to go backwards . ” today ’s health service is barely standing still . we need to reduce the waiting lists , and to get 3 million working - age people back to work as soon as possible . i know from my time as the mayor of derby that so much of the good being done daily never makes the headlines ; good deeds do not appear to sell newspapers or attract advertising . but in my few weeks in this role , i have already met some remarkable people and organisations who are making a difference in the constituency and further afield . aquabox is a cromford charity with over 80 volunteers who supply clean water solutions to people in disaster zones . terry eckersley at river network provides social housing and a second chance to people in need . bakewell youth theatre has been led and inspired by sue stones for 46 years . i appreciate that this is on a different scale , but chatsworth house , no less , has given invaluable opportunities to children and young people in the area by having a “ takeover ” day at the world - famous stately home . i must mention ben woodroffe , our world champion toe wrestler — yes , it ’s a thing . as well as being a great bloke and a champion , he has raised valuable funds for the mental health charity mind . i hope the days of having a reasonable expectation that one ’s children will do well in life are not over , but they seem at least to be on pause . a lack of housing , a reduction in opportunity due to political decision making , unrestrained social media and a climate crisis mean that my children are entering adulthood with much greater uncertainty than i did . as a foster carer of teenage children for 24 years , i know how tough things are for young people in general , but they are much harder for young people leaving care now than they were just a few years ago . local authorities are running on fumes , so the support has diminished , and unfortunately the prejudice against care - experienced young people still persists . the new government must work towards fixing the broken children ’s social care market , address the lack of placement sufficiency , and end the profiteering from vulnerable children that is driving our local authorities to the brink of bankruptcy . i did not even bother to check with the commons library , but i am very sure that i am the first former singer of a progressive metal band to be elected to this house . although my gigging days are behind me , i think , i am extremely pleased that the labour government will seek a deal with the eu to help our touring acts , who suffer no end of red tape when trying to get to the continent to ply their trade . the uk music industry has been an enormous success story over many decades and we need to support all of it — not just the multimillion selling acts , but the ones playing to a couple of hundred people , who will hopefully be tomorrow ’s multimillion selling acts . during my campaign , i was struck by the sheer number of constituents whose no . 1 priority for an incoming government was either the climate or nature , so i feel empowered to say that as influencers and makers of law , we have a duty to think not just in the short term and until the next election , but about those who have not even been born yet , and to leave behind a habitable planet . i was particularly proud to campaign under a banner of public service — service to our constituents and the nation . country first , party second . we are here not for the status , but for the people who elected us . i will try to keep reminding myself of that . we must deliver on our commitments , but we must also treat the staff here , the staff working in our offices , our colleagues in local government and in the civil service and our constituents with the respect that they deserve . if we can do that , we will move this great bastion of democracy a little closer to the people it serves . rose — order . due to time pressures , there will immediately be a three - minute time limit , other than for maiden speeches , which members should try to make around seven minutes long — certainly no longer . i call sir john hayes . i will make five points in three minutes — if i can pull that off , i trust i will go up even further in your estimation , madam deputy speaker . first , this government , like all governments , need to recognise that the food chain in this country is distorted by the power of a handful of huge corporate retailers . for far too long they have taken the lion ’s share of the agricultural cake . it is critical that we rebalance the chain in favour of primary and secondary producers . previous governments have done some work on that , with the establishment of the groceries code adjudicator . i was in government when that was set up , but it needs more teeth to act on sharp practice by retailers who run ragged over primary producers . secondly , we need a strategy for food security . that means recognising that food security is as important as energy security ; they must not be made competitors one with the other . we saw during covid and after the start of the war in ukraine just what damage the unforeseen and unexpected can do to international markets and supply lines . it is critical that we grow more of what we consume , and shorten those supply lines to ensure that people will be fed by produce that is made here in the united kingdom . is my right hon . friend disappointed , as i am , that the secretary of state did not say more about food security , and how we can make sure that a greater share of our food comes from this country ? my right hon . friend has been a champion of these matters for a considerable period . i have hopes of the secretary of state . i had a debate just before the recess in which the minister for food security and rural affairs participated . i made the case for food security , and he gave me a fair hearing . i look forward to the meeting to which i know he is about to invite me ; i can bring along a group of farmers and growers , to have that ongoing conversation . the core point is that food security matters . it not only helps with economic resilience but assists with traceability , quality , standards — all those things . my third point was stimulated by the secretary of state ’s comments about investment and our need to think big . we do indeed . to maintain productivity and efficiency in farming and growing , we need to look to the future . that means greater automation and changing the way we go about the food production business . it means greater integration , but not at the expense of the small farmers and growers . an efficient system does not necessarily mean exclusively huge farm businesses , as we need an entry point to the industry . if we simply create a handful of very large corporate farmers , we will not allow the kind of fluidity necessary to maintain the health of the industry . my fourth point is on procurement . the government need to use procurement to support british produce . it is not that difficult , but no government , of any party , have got it right . we have made some progress over time , as different governments have launched different initiatives , but we need to use the public purse to support what we do in this country more effectively . my final point is this : we can have a debate about the detail of policy but , as has been said by the shadow secretary of state and others , we need to take a bigger view than the partisan knockabout that too often prevails in this kind of discussion . this is about the future good of our people through the production of food to feed the nation . as chair of the all - party parliamentary group for food security , i have been working across the house to ensure that we work towards affordable food that is available and accessible to everyone . yet from some of the contributions i have heard from conservative members , it is clear that over the past 14 years they have not reflected on how they have failed rural communities . we would not be here today if they had held the mantle on food security . our farmers already have low confidence because the conservatives eroded their trust , but our rural communities are not a political football . they deserve respect . they want action , not words . if the opposition think that rural affairs is tricky ground for those on the labour benches , they can well and truly think again . just look at our new crop of labour mps . we won seats right across the country , from scarborough to south pembrokeshire . the farming community has firm friends on the labour benches . let me turn to work that the government are doing , from unlocking precision breeding to launching a new deal for farmers . the government ’s work on food security transcends the work of a single department , from seeking to secure a new veterinary agreement to launching gb energy , which will lower production costs . we are also paving the way on flood resilience . if i may , i will draw on some local context in york . i visited a fantastic carrot farm in york outer , but i was gobsmacked to hear that in a bad year of flooding it can lose a quarter of its crop . i dread to think about the impacts if we do not turn the tide of climate change . that is why i urge the continuation of critical resilience funds to support farmers like the one i met . water scarcity is a critical issue . there are real pressures , despite the wettest 18 months on record . it must be 30 years since we last built a reservoir , and farmers struggle from drought , too . as my hon . friend said , many labour members are supportive of farmers . i am a proud farmer ’s daughter and i am delighted to speak in this debate . the previous government sold farmers down the river . we had disastrous trade deals and they suffer from terrible weather — we can , at least , say that that was not the tories ’ fault . does my hon . friend agree that if we are to support welsh farmers , they need a strong financial package ? i thank my hon . friend , who is a fantastic advocate for her constituents . the agriculture budget is hugely important to protect food security . another critical issue is biosecurity , so i was disappointed to see that the opposition left it out of their motion . at present , the uk has a number of confirmed cases of bluetongue . i was briefed by the deputy chief veterinary officer earlier today . i welcome the secretary of state ’s action on bluetongue serotype 3 vaccines . that , coupled with the exclusion zones policy , is a welcome first response to what is a complex crisis fuelled by climate change — i will not get into the intricacies of midges and the wind from the continent . that is a clear signal that the government are taking biosecurity seriously . i want to touch on my recent engagement with sainsbury ’s . i hope colleagues from across the house will join me in welcoming food retailers that put food security at the heart of their business model . i am encouraged by what sainsbury ’s is doing . i am conscious of time , but i just stress that food is one of the 13 critical national infrastructure sectors in the uk . food security is national security , so i respectfully say to the opposition : stop the politics and work constructively with us on food security . it is great to see the government making progress . i look forward to working with them to safeguard britain ’s national food security . i call dr roz savage to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to speak to the house . i also thank my hon . friends for their contributions to this important debate on food and farming . it is an absolute honour to address the chamber as the newly elected member of parliament for south cotswolds . it is a new constituency , formed from parts of the former cotswolds and north wiltshire seats . the cotswolds has a well - deserved reputation for natural and architectural beauty . it always gladdens my heart to see the soaring , slender spire of st mary ’s church in tetbury , the elegant honeystone buildings around the marketplace in cirencester , or the awe - inspiring arches of malmesbury abbey . we have beautiful villages , including three category winners of the wiltshire best kept villages competition : ashton keynes , seagry and hankerton . we have vibrant communities , thriving businesses , and visionary innovators and inventors . king charles had the good taste to choose highgrove , near tetbury , as his country home , and his gardens are well worth a visit ; i am still waiting for my invitation to join his majesty there for an organic cream tea . south cotswolds is a rural constituency , characterised by a rich agricultural landscape , with a proud farming heritage and a plethora of fabulous farmers ’ markets full of tempting goodies . eighty - seven per cent of the land within the cotswolds area of outstanding natural beauty is dedicated to agriculture , and we have more than 750 farm holdings in south cotswolds , employing over 2,000 people . our beautiful landscape is a diverse mix of crops and grassland , and livestock farming constitutes a significant sector , with cattle , sheep and pigs . i can recommend cirencester livestock market as probably the best place in the constituency , if not the country , to get a gargantuan farmer ’s breakfast that really sets you up for the day — if not for the entire week . the cotswolds is known for our traditional farming practices — most of the farms are family run , and often have been for many , many generations — but there is plenty of innovation too . earlier this year , i hosted an event at the royal agricultural university in cirencester , where we heard that many farms in the region are embracing sustainable and regenerative approaches , focusing on soil health , wildlife conservation and local food production . the “ royal ag ” itself is leading the field , so to speak , with zero dig farming methods . however , not all is rosy in the cotswolds garden . our farmers are frustrated by the absence of a long - term strategy . they need to plan 20 or 30 years ahead , beyond the next electoral cycle . they need a clear vision of the future , a vision that can survive changes of government . we need to attract more young people into farming . last year , i “ helped ” a couple of farmers to bring in the brussels sprout harvest . as i stood in a muddy field on a grey december day , they told me about the problems they had had in recruiting young people into farming . thirty - eight per cent of farmers are 65 or older , and only 15 % are under 45 . astonishingly , it seems that not many young people enjoy being out in the middle of a field in all weathers , doing hard physical work for very little money ! a significant number of them do , but the main obstacle is gaining access to land . i was pleased to hear the secretary of state imply that he would be working to encourage more younger people into farming , making it easier and more rewarding for them to help to feed our country high - quality food that has not travelled halfway around the world . on the south - eastern edge of my constituency , a really exciting initiative is under way at the marvellously named crapper ’s landfill site , which is leading on sustain circles . this concept aims to meet 80 % of a community ’s food , housing , jobs and energy needs within a defined radius around the community , increasing self - reliance and resilience . the idea is being pioneered with a plan to position pressurised plastic greenhouses on old landfill zones , using the methane emissions from the decomposing rubbish to heat the greenhouses . it aims to grow enough fruit and vegetables to feed royal wootton bassett , brinkworth and malmesbury . we need more creative projects like this . elsewhere in wiltshire , a proposal for a massive solar farm on 2,000 acres of mostly agricultural land has sparked debate about how we choose to use our land . we need to stop thinking , “ housing here , renewables here and food production here , ” and to look at more creative ways to make our land multi - layered and multi - purpose . it is becoming clearer than ever that we need an integrated strategy , not least because building more houses will increase rainwater run - off and increase the burden on an already overloaded sewage system . in my constituency in the last year alone , the fairford sewage treatment works pumped untreated sewage into the river coln for 3,391 hours , which equates to over four and a half months . incidents that are meant to be exceptional are happening on average over three times a week . across the constituency , sewage is flooding into houses , gardens and schools . it is flooding out across fields , where cattle consume it , get sick and die . i urge thames water to upgrade the fairford sewage works as a matter of the utmost urgency , and ofwat to make sure that it does . for me , the cleanliness or otherwise of our rivers is personal , and i would like to share a little background . i am not from anywhere in particular . my father was a methodist minister , and my parents moved house for the first time when i was two years old . they continued to move house with annoying frequency thereafter . my father ’s excuse was that he ran out of sermons after a certain number of years , so we had to move house so that he could recycle them . i am all in favour of recycling , but i think he presumed a higher degree of attention , and a longer span of memory , than the typical church member has . sadly , my parents are no longer around to see me take my seat in this house , but i know they would have been proud . above all else , they believed that their job was to serve the community as exemplars of god ’s love , and i am honoured to follow in their footsteps — but i digress . since i have been old enough to choose where i live , i seem to keep coming back to the river thames . i took my first oar strokes on the thames in oxford , and rowed out of thames rowing club in putney for several years . i lived in fulham , putney , brentford , kew , richmond and windsor before moving to the cotswolds . the river thames rises in my constituency as little more than a trickle just outside cricklade , gradually gathering tributaries , including the highly polluted coln , to become the magnificent father thames that flows past these houses of parliament . the thames has been a constant thread throughout much of my adult life , so i care passionately about water issues , and about climate and nature more generally . this is a passion that led me , in my 30s , to spend an inordinate amount of time alone in a tiny rowboat in the middle of various oceans as i rowed solo across the atlantic , pacific and indian , using my voyages to raise awareness of environmental issues and our growing ecological crisis . along the way , i gained some really impressive callouses , four guinness world records and , hopefully , some highly transferable skills in navigating shark - infested waters , which may possibly stand me in good stead in my new career . like many who care about our environment , i sometimes despair , but in closing i would like to say that what gives me hope for the future is the public spirit , the energy and the goodness that i see in action in the south cotswolds . when the government are telling us that there is no money and councils are struggling , i see our communities coming together , using their creativity and resourcefulness to work out how to make a little go a long way , sharing resources , looking to their neighbours , donating time and skills and looking out for each other . we have fabulous organisations , including the cirencester pantry , heals of malmesbury , and community fridges in purton , malmesbury and tetbury . it is so inspiring to see people coming together in mutual support . people of the south cotswolds , you inspire me and you humble me . i am so grateful to my constituents for trusting me to represent their interests and those of this country . i commit to doing my absolute best to rise to this challenge with unwavering determination , integrity and dedication . it is an absolute honour to follow i am extremely grateful to the hon . gentleman for giving way . i would like to pay tribute to my neighbour , it is lovely to hear a bit of cross - party action to start off ; i will try not to spoil that tone . today ’s debate is a vital one on the future of not only south norfolk ’s food security but that of the uk . for too long , those who have put food on our table have worked our land but sadly been taken for granted . i stand here as the first labour mp for south norfolk in 74 years . that should show the house that rural communities up and down the country have wanted change , and it is for us to prove that we are ready to take up that mantle . in south norfolk we are lucky , because we have the innovation of the norwich research park . those who are local — i can see nodding from i welcome the news from the front bench that the government will be taking action on precision breeding . that is a great step forward in what we needed to see . there is an incredible opportunity in the heart of south norfolk to transform our food security and to support farmers on the frontline who are dealing with the consequences of climate change in producing more food with less impact on the environment . as we address the challenges facing our farmers and the urgent need to secure our food supply , it is important to highlight the amazing work of the earlham institute . the earlham institute is a beacon of life sciences training and innovation , and its contributions are vital to tackling food insecurity and safeguarding our future . its cutting - edge research is developing the latest tools and approaches to monitor and predict how diseases evolve and spread . this kind of knowledge is critical for the future of british farming , as it will allow us to anticipate and mitigate the risks that threaten our food security . the earlham institute ’s contributions go far beyond research . it is also a hub for training the next generation of scientists and ensuring that britain remains at the forefront of life sciences and agricultural innovation . i am immensely proud to represent the constituency that is home to such important institutions . the earlham institute is doing the hard work necessary to safeguard our food security and supply . faced with the challenges of water security — sadly , i note that that was missing from the opposition ’s motion — farmers tell me when i meet them that there is a huge barrier in the way of their collecting the water that they need and building the reservoirs that they want on their land because of action taken by the environment agency . why on earth should we stand in the way of farmers who want to protect their land from drought , while also protecting local areas from flood risk , by capturing water to use at a lower cost than tapping into the mains water that we all need ? i hope that my front - bench colleagues will work with me to secure planning reform on this issue , so that we can build more reservoirs on farming land to help with food security . farmers have also raised concerns with me about biodiversity net - gain regulations , which are currently slowing down our progress on food production . i recently visited fischer farms , just over the border , and it is a great step forward . i hope that we can adopt these measures . i call david chadwick to make his maiden speech . i stand here as the first ever mp for brecon , radnor and cwm tawe . it is the largest constituency in england and wales , and i therefore have a foot in two worlds — one in rural mid - wales and the other in the swansea valley . i wish to pay tribute to my predecessors , fay jones and christina rees , for their commitment to welsh politics and their service to these communities . the north of the constituency starts in the uplands of radnorshire , a historical county featuring the market towns of knighton , rhayader — the outdoors capital of wales — and presteigne . our constituency has three spa towns : llandrindod wells , builth wells and llanwrtyd wells . builth wells , of course , is where the royal welsh show , europe ’s largest agricultural gathering , takes place each summer . at the centre of the constituency is my handsome , historical hometown of brecon , which is home to the army in wales and a thriving nepalese community . the world book town of hay - on - wye shows that a small rural town can be a world leader , as does britain ’s best high street in crickhowell , not forgetting the horticultural talents on display in talgarth . at the head of the swansea valley is ystradgynlais , the birthplace of the british iron industry , and pontardawe , where the roof of the white house was made . this enormous constituency was not created by popular demand but was welded together following the previous government ’s decision to cut the number of welsh constituencies by a fifth . wales responded by cutting the number of welsh conservative mps to zero . welsh farmers will not forget the trade deals that the previous government signed with new zealand and australia . wales wants a fairer deal from this parliament . yesterday , we debated the challenges facing the nhs in england . many of my constituents travel to england for nhs treatment , and i have tried healthcare systems across the world . i was run over by a car in the netherlands and was paralysed by guillain - barré syndrome in argentina — it was a tough couple of years — so i have seen how high - quality healthcare changes lives and saves lives . i am sorry to say that the welsh nhs is in dire straits . its outcomes are worse than those in england , yet no equivalent review is taking place in wales . instead , the welsh government are forcing health boards to make heavy budget cuts . they are proposing to cut the opening hours of minor injuries units at hospitals in brecon , llandrindod wells and ystradgynlais , forcing local residents to travel long distances , relying on roads that are often closed or bus journeys that can take a whole day . people living in rural areas should not have to pay a rural penalty to access healthcare . indeed , rural areas can help to tackle the healthcare crisis we face . let us take obesity , for example . we can lighten the load on our nhs by bettering the nation ’s diet . if we recognised the true value of good food and local produce , we would appreciate the public health and environmental benefits from money spent on the agriculture budget . the government must be aware of the agriculture budget ’s massive multiplier effect for the rural economy , and they should give farmers the stability and funding they need . food security is a major concern . some 61 % of farmers are considering giving up , and the farming workforce is dwindling . our farmers and growers produce world - class produce , battling harsh weather and constantly changing market conditions . these market conditions are often set by the retail giants , and i know that my predecessor , roger williams , fought to level the relationship between retailers and farmers by strengthening the groceries code adjudicator . it is a shame that the conservatives did not do more to strengthen that code during their time in office . i will carry on that fight . during the past week , we have seen an important campaign by riverford , holding supermarkets to account for misleading shoppers with fake farm brands and driving britain ’s family farms to the brink . that is just one example of the challenges that farmers face . we need to champion local food systems , not imports . let us support the movement towards rebuilding local supply chains , driven by a new generation of rural entrepreneurs , who are opening restaurants , building brands , bringing back jobs and remaking our high streets . that spirit of innovation still flourishes in wales . we once had the lead in industrial sciences . we were the world ’s first industrial nation , but now wales is £ 10,000 a head poorer than england , and still shedding jobs . for both of my grandfathers , the steel industry was the first rung on the career ladder . one of them climbed the ladders at port talbot , but now those ladders have been taken away . those jobs must be replaced for the families in my constituency who are now facing unemployment before christmas . if this government want to back welsh industry and welsh jobs , they can show it by backing the global centre for rail excellence in onllwyn . great britain has no all - purpose testing centre for railway vehicles and infrastructure , but a former mine has been repurposed to be that facility . give us the tools and we will get on with it , for we still know how to dig ourselves out of a hole in wales . we are a creative people . we love music , words and singing . we love reading about other people , which is why my constituency sustains three local newspapers — the brecon and radnor express , the county times and the mid wales journal — as well as the ponty mag , the beacon and the rhosgoch gossip . finally , i thank my partner , gemma , whose bravery and resourcefulness continue to inspire me ; my son , william ; and our next soon - to - be - born child , who does not have a name yet . i am opting for enzo , so i would love the house ’s support for that . i dedicate my work here to fighting for the future they deserve . i congratulate i have become very fond of saying that i am the mp for the largest constituency in england , where i am conscious that agricultural and rural communities have a significant stake . they make a significant contribution to the local economy . if the farms were taken out of the constituency , it would not just be the economy that is ruined ; the landscape and tourism would also be ruined , and countless communities that have existed for centuries would be undermined . unfortunately , our rural communities are in the midst of a crisis , including a depopulation crisis . young people can not find the jobs and homes that allow them to afford to remain where they grew up , and therefore we have an ageing population . hospitality businesses are unable to continue to grow and are forced to close their doors . that is directly linked to the crisis in our farming communities , because they are often the customers for those businesses . over the weekend i was privileged to visit goodfellow farming in longwitton , on the eastern border of my constituency . i spoke to the owner about the shape of british farming and the very real crisis we have inherited from the conservatives . the shadow farming minister , the people of the hexham constituency voted for labour for the first time ever at the last election because they recognise the crises we face . i say that not to make a hackneyed political point , but to make a real point about the work that i intend to do , as a new member in the house , to shine a light on the depopulation crisis we face . i gently remind shadow ministers on the opposition front bench that we know that we have inherited a very broken farming system . i was delighted to welcome my right hon . friend the now secretary of state to my constituency during the general election campaign to meet local farmers . i am confident that this government and this front - bench team are listening to them and that we can work to drive up standards in our farming and secure generational farms for the future . ultimately , a department that managed to underspend by £ 300 million is not one that was functioning properly under the previous government . i say that not to be overtly political , but simply to emphasise that we need a government who work in the interests of communities up and down the tyne valley and from the county durham border up to the scottish border . it is an honour to follow my constituency neighbour across the border , today ’s debate is on a topic that interests me greatly as the son of a farmer , and also as a proud mp for a rural constituency where farmers , land managers and workers in the rural economy deliver some of the finest produce anywhere in the united kingdom . we have so many outstanding farmers and food producers in the scottish borders it is impossible to name even half of them . we should be immensely proud of the food and drink produced here on our doorstep , but too often the concerns and the needs of farmers are taken for granted . they are overlooked by the snp government at holyrood and now they seem to be ignored by the labour government here at westminster . politicians in those parties talk freely of the need for food security , but they do not seem to understand who delivers that food security . they speak of the need for great and high - quality produce without properly recognising the hard work that goes into producing it . they talk of the benefits of reaching net zero targets by managing land effectively and reducing the air miles for food , but do not give enough credit to the farmers who are achieving that . if members wonder what i mean , they should look no further than this labour government . the labour party manifesto for the recent general election made no mention of its plan for funding for farming . i know that many farmers in my constituency of stone , great wyrley and penkridge are deeply worried about some of the talk about changes to the tax regime , not just to inheritance tax , but to capital gains tax , and how that will impact the future viability of their business and the ability for farms to be farmed by families . my right hon . friend makes an excellent point about both the funding arrangements and the tax changes that have been speculated about in the press . farmers are in the dark about what comes next . there may be budget cuts and there may be financial pain , but they do not really know . the government should be listening to nfu scotland , which recently submitted a detailed budget submission to the united kingdom government . let me put on record what that submission said . it underlined the need for an increased , multi - annual , ringfenced agriculture and rural economy funding commitment in the budget . labour must also pay attention to the warning from nfu scotland that , without adequate funding from the uk government , the majority of farmers in scotland would cease to be viable . this labour government can not do to farmers what they have done to pensioners by cutting their winter fuel payment . the change they promised in the election is already looking hollow to the scottish and british public . if they go on to cut farmers ’ funding , that will reveal again that labour is not on the side of businesses and workers . it will show that all its priorities are wrong . i do hope that it will see sense , listen to our farmers and do the right thing . in addressing food security , i wish to begin with food insecurity . both families and farmers across the uk have seen increasing food and energy bills because of the chop and change policies of the previous government . more than 12,000 farmers and agri - businesses have been forced out of business since 2010 due to tory neglect . furthermore , repeated sell - out trade deals — we have heard about the botched brexit deal — have lumbered farming with the lowest profitability of any sector in the economy . it is important to my constituents in bathgate and linlithgow , and to all our constituents , that we have a stable and secure supply of food . we need to see earnings returned to farmers as profit , not spent on costly energy bills . for households across the country , the cost of energy has undermined personal food security . farming is exposed to skyrocketing energy prices and the soaring cost of animal feed and fertiliser , which is up 44 % compared with 2019 . in recent months , we have heard from some opposition members that solar energy farms are a risk to our food security . i am very glad that we heard mention of the nfu president — whose ears must be burning today — because he called for balance when criticisms are made of where and when land is taken out of production . perhaps the conservatives could take note of that constructive approach . the farming community has shown great initiative and led on solar energy — something that opposition members have failed to recognise . nfu scotland has struck a new deal with a major solar energy company , affirming that the land use required for new solar initiatives would have a marginal impact on farming . that deal involves farmers , who know the land best , in identifying sites for development and earnings from that partnership , and i believe that the house should welcome such commitment to net zero and to collaborative working . as a result of cutting energy costs and delivering more revenue directly to farmers , such working offers the opportunity for a positive future between the farming community and renewable energies . for farmers it is not just about energy costs , but about market access and trade , as we have heard ; and delivering for farmers does not just mean fixing the problems of previous botched trade deals . i welcome the government ’s quick action to ensure that our farmers get a fair deal , meaning lowered energy costs and increased renewable energy sources , and ensuring that households , including farmers , have the means and the ability to put food on the table . i call luke taylor to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for giving me this opportunity . it is a pleasure to follow the fine speeches from my hon . friend i do not exaggerate when i say that it is the honour of my life to serve as the member of parliament for sutton and cheam . i am so grateful to the thousands of residents who put their trust in me just a few months ago . i promise them : i will always do my very best for you and our communities , from sutton to worcester park , cheam to belmont and everywhere in between . i hope i am already going some way to repaying the trust they have put in me by voting to end the two - child benefit cap , voting to save the winter fuel payment , and already helping hundreds of them with issues and concerns through my office . to the people who did not vote for me , or did not vote at all , who have lost all faith in politics and its servants , please allow me the opportunity to restore some of that trust . to my predecessor , paul scully , i say thank you for his nine years of service to sutton and cheam . politically , we agreed on very little , but i know he did what he thought was best for our residents . i also take the opportunity to pay tribute to my liberal democrat predecessor paul burstow , who served for 18 years and whose name is still fondly remembered by so many residents on the doorstep . and to my loved ones — my wife and children , my mum and dad — i say that i would not be here without your support . as the father of the house may remember , my dad stood against him in gainsborough in 1992 and ’ 97 . therefore i must thank him , too , for helping to ensure that i am the first member of my family to find themselves in this place , rather than my old man . sutton and cheam is small , but it is perfectly formed . it is the smallest of all 72 liberal democrat constituencies . our boundaries have remained largely unchanged for 80 years , which alone must prove that sutton and cheam is the greatest constituency in the country . they got it right in 1945 and they have not felt the need to change it ever since . i could give members a guided tour of our beautiful constituency but , for me , it is the people who make up our community and make sutton and cheam what it is . we have recyclers , repairers and reusers improving sustainability and protecting our planet . we have litter pickers , bulb planters and neighbourhood watchers making our area safer , cleaner and better to live in . we have sutton fans , dons fans , palace fans , chelsea fans and even the odd long - suffering spurs supporter . we have had recent arrivals of hongkongers , ukrainians and afghanis who have come to sutton to find a new home . we have long - established communities of tamils , ahmadiyyas , jews , hindus , sikhs and muslims . we have anglicans and atheists , catholics and methodists — all building the unique mosaic of our communities . our local football team , sutton united fc , play at gander green lane , in my council ward , where their fight to rejoin the football league continues . a recent point apiece from eastleigh and yeovil — other lib dem constituencies — will help us get there , but the generous people of woking gave us three points only two weeks ago , so i thank my hon . friend as many of my colleagues will know , however , there is only so much that councils and councillors can do to tackle the biggest problems that governments have failed to solve for years . that is why i decided to run for election to this house : to tackle the national issues that people in my constituency face . for as long as i can remember , i have wanted to fix things . i went from building lego as a child to rebuilding gearboxes as a teenager . i attended my local comprehensive school in rural lincolnshire , and many of my friends and classmates growing up were involved in the critical work that farmers do to keep food on our tables and act as stewards for our environment — vital tasks that this debate correctly highlights . at school , i served as a prefect , alongside my passion for fixing things led me to london and to imperial college , where i studied engineering , which led to many years working in the transport industry around the world , but there is so much more that needs fixing in our country than planes , trains and automobiles . raising my family in sutton and cheam with my wonderful wife , i have seen at first hand the broken cogs and blown fuses across our public services , from the nhs and social care to education and policing . in today ’s britain , the social contract has been broken . in our politics , cynicism and self - interest have replaced service and duty , and many feel that it is simply no longer true that if they work hard and play by the rules , they will enjoy the security and opportunity that everyone deserves . a fair deal no longer exists between the british state and the people , and that is evident across every policy area . as an engineer , i feel confident in saying that the very foundations of our country are broken . it is time that we picked up our tools to fix them . as the liberal democrat front - bench spokesperson for our capital , i will hold the government to account for all londoners — fixing london ’s creaking infrastructure and never - ending housing crisis , and pushing for reform of and proper funding for the met . if people have been listening to the lib dems for the last few years , they will know exactly what the river thames is full of . there is much to be said on all those topics , but i will finish by highlighting one that is dear to me and my constituents : hospices . one of the first emails i received after being elected was from our local hospice , st raph ’s , which is searching for help to stop £ 1 million - worth of funding cuts that would see staff made redundant and clinical services slashed . the cuts would put sutton ’s gps , hospitals and district nurses under huge and unmanageable pressure , and leave families abandoned , unsupported and in genuine distress at a time when they need kindness and support the most . for patients , the cuts could tragically hasten their passing and deny them their dignity . in this parliament , we have an opportunity to build a better plan , so that people have somewhere to spend their final days in the comfort and care that we all deserve as human beings . i look forward to working with members from across the house . if they will pick up their tools with this engineer , who knows a thing or two about fixing things , together we can fix our country , restore trust and deliver hope . may i start by paying my respects to the resident who died in my constituency during the recent floods ? i am sure that the thoughts of the whole house are with her family . i thank the secretary of state for leaving the labour conference early to visit northamptonshire and ensure that we had the support that we needed . over 1,000 northampton south residents were evacuated from their homes . i thank unfortunately , i can not support the opposition ’s motion . i believe that we should support all possible funding opportunities for our farmers , but the motion seeks to commit the government to underfunded — and in some cases imaginary — policies proposed in may 2024 by the previous prime minister . those policies have contributed to the £ 22 - billion black hole that the labour party has inherited . they were political gestures and not a real offer to the uk farming community . people saw through that : 61 % of people told farmers weekly that they trusted a labour government , whereas only 6 % trusted the conservatives . does my hon . friend agree that the fact that so many labour mps have a farming background , as i do , and that so many rural seats are represented by labour , makes it clear that we are now the true champions of our farming community ? it is very clear that labour is on the side of our farming and agricultural sector . i stand here as the hopeful chair of the all - party parliamentary group for food . i am sure that those who are concerned about food security will join us at our inaugural general meeting very shortly . i am also a member of the nfu ’s food and farming fellowship . it is clear that labour members take this issue seriously , and we are dedicating time to ensure that , unlike the previous government , we work with farmers , not against them . we are also working across industry . the motion focuses solely on farming , but in order to deliver food security , there must be a cross - sector approach , as i am sure everyone in the house recognises . the approach should include food manufacturing , logistics , retail and the hospitality chain . the whole agrifood ecosystem delivers a gross value added of £ 147 billion to our economy , including £ 15 billion through our farming sector , and a whopping £ 70 billion through our manufacturing , distribution and wholesale sector in food and retail . we want to improve food security in the uk , which is already classified as “ broadly stable ” by defra . on the issue of stability , i remind my hon . friend of the opening lines of labour ’s 2010 food and farming strategy : “ we ca n’t carry on just as we are . ” farmers i have met in my constituency would make exactly the same claim now , given the record of the last conservative government , who scrapped labour ’s food plan in 2010 . does he agree that if we are to invest in food and farming , and to bring jobs and prosperity to rural and urban constituencies , we must back labour ’s new deal for farmers , invest in food and farming jobs , and put a real plan for food security back on the table ? i could not agree more , and could not have said it better myself . however , a holistic approach must be taken across the whole ecosystem to subsidies , funding and investment . one reason why i chose to speak today is that food security is important to me and my constituents . a recent study found that nearly 10 % of people in northampton struggle to access food , and that gets worse in rural northamptonshire , as i am sure my constituency neighbour , i commend the opposition for supporting the government ’s efforts to improve food security , but the motion is not the way to do that . we must work together , collaboratively and across parties , to support the agrifood industry , and i hope that the opposition will endeavour to do so after their motion is defeated . we in this country have the best farmers . they produce food to the highest animal welfare standards , and we should be very proud of them . food security is a key part of national security , and i urge the government to look at the efra committee ’s report on food security from the last parliament . the previous government took up the recommendation for an annual food security report , and i urge the government to continue with that . they must protect the farming budget , not cut it , and must protect land , not bulldoze it for solar . we have to make sure that solar goes in the right places : on industrial buildings , brownfield land and rooftops , not on prime food - producing land . we must also protect inputs . in the past few years , we have lost the ability to produce a lot of fertiliser in the united kingdom . we need to look at that as a matter of resilience . biosecurity is a key part of national security . as we have heard , we have a lot of cases of bluetongue in the south and east of england ; we know what happened in the past couple of years with avian influenza ; and we have african swine fever advancing up the continent . the government must act , and they must support the animal and plant health agency , which is in urgent need of full redevelopment . the efra committee has called for that redevelopment , and i know that defra wants it , so i urge ministers to make the case to the treasury for it to be funded in full . my hon . friend guested on the public accounts committee last year , when we had a full inquiry on this issue . there is a real need for proper capital investment , because the biosecurity of the nation is at risk if we do not have properly biosecure laboratories . i thank my hon . friend the chair of the public accounts committee for that intervention . it is so important that the government listen to this request and fund the redevelopment of the apha in full . my journey into politics started in 2001 with the outbreak of foot and mouth disease . i know what the implications are — i saw sights then that i never want to see again in my lifetime — and we have seen what happens when biosecurity breaks down . that brings me to mental health , which has been touched on . i thank the hon . gentleman for giving way on the point of farmers ’ mental health . as my constituency neighbour , will he join me in championing yana — you are not alone — a local charity that is now stretching into essex , and supports the mental health of farmers and rural workers ? i would be happy to champion yana , the royal agricultural benevolent institution , yellow wellies , and all the other institutions and charities that support mental health . i urge the government to look at the efra committee ’s report last year on rural mental health , which touches on many of these issues and makes key recommendations . we need to support our farming communities when serious things happen , such as flooding or disease outbreaks . when something more chronic happens — say , when farms get a positive result during periodic tuberculosis testing — we need to make sure that the mental health of farmers , vets , and everyone else is supported . that is so important . we have talked about flooding . people in rural and urban communities in flood risk areas have not only the trauma of being flooded , but the anxiety of worrying about being flooded . ministers will be called out in their wellies in floods , but communities need to be supported when the waters go down and the blue lights leave — that is another key recommendation of our report . we need to protect the farming budget and make sure that the money goes out through the farming recovery fund to support flooded communities . we can help our farming and food - producing communities . we encourage people to buy british , and i pay tribute to the nfu and to my hon . friend as a distinguished vet , my hon . friend is making a powerful case on welfare standards . does he agree that one of the great prizes of british agriculture is that it sets such high welfare standards , and that one of the good things the last government did was pass legislation on transporting animals , setting ever higher standards for uk farmers ? absolutely ; that was a key bill . animal welfare unites us in humanity across this house , and i urge us to work across parties on it . as i have said , farmers in this country produce to the highest animal welfare standards , and we should be proud of that and protect them . my understanding is that the 2019 conservative party manifesto said : “ when we leave the eu , we will be able to encourage the public sector to ‘ buy british ’ to support our farmers and reduce environmental costs . ” what went wrong ? i thank the hon . member for his intervention . i finish by saying that food security is national security , biosecurity is national security , and we must protect both . my grandad was a tenant dairy farmer , and rural communities such as mine feel let down by the conservative party . i spoke earlier about a close family friend who took his life following a farm inspection . many farmers who had been let down and forced out of producing food were my clients when i practised as a high - street solicitor in north warwickshire . they could have done with the £ 300 million that the conservative party failed to allocate to the support of rural farmers . they needed a better inspection regime that worked for them and for consumers . i was inspired recently when visiting aldi , which has its national headquarters in my constituency , because it is passionate about british food and forming good relationships with local farmers . the agriculture and food industry sector contributes £ 148 billion to the economy , and provides 4.2 million jobs in the uk , including many jobs in my constituency . however , the conservative party created a cost of living crisis that forced families to buy less fresh food , particularly vegetables , because they could not afford it . that squeezed our local farmers further . because the last government did not prioritise energy or food security , farmers were crippled by escalating energy prices , and animal feed and fertiliser prices . the last government ’s chop - and - change approach to rolling out environmental land management schemes left farmers reeling with uncertainty , and it is no wonder that they and their representatives are looking to this government for much - needed reassurance . we need to reassure our farmers and give them the confidence to invest for the future . we need to make sure that they know that this government have their back . rural and freight crime in my constituency , like many others , has become intolerable . the conservative party left rural criminals to roam free , with crime in rural areas spiralling out of control . farmers are losing valuable equipment essential to the running of their businesses , and to add insult to injury , they are often the ones left to clear up fly - tipping . i am glad to be part of a party and a government taking rural crime seriously with a cross - government rural crime strategy that is the first of its kind . this strategy will crack down on issues such as fly - tipping and antisocial behaviour that affect rural communities such as mine . i am looking forward — order . the time is up , i am afraid . i rise to proudly voice my support for the 27,000 farming families across northern ireland who , day in and day out , work tirelessly to help feed our nation . i also stand for the 100,000 people employed in the agrifood sector directly or indirectly , and the 10 million people across the uk who consume northern ireland ’s top - quality produce on a daily basis . we dup members take great pride in the fact that northern ireland sets a high bar for food quality , animal welfare and environmental standards . our farms are committed to sustainable practices , ensuring that food is produced responsibly and with respect for our landscapes and ecosystems . despite the efforts of those who unfairly criticise our farming community and treat them as scapegoats for climate change , our farmers should be seen as partners , not problems . they are already working with some of the most rigorous environmental regulations , and should be recognised for their role in meeting climate targets across the uk . farmers are and always have been the best custodians of our land . they must be enshrined in uk policy , given a seat at the table in key discussions and supported financially , so that they can continue their vital work . however , not all is well in the industry . northern ireland is grappling with the daily impacts of the protocol and the windsor framework , which have created significant uncertainty . our agri - industry is subject to more than 120 eu laws over which we have no democratic say , and our agriculture sector faces unnecessary trade barriers and supply chain issues that complicate the movement of goods between great britain and northern ireland . does the hon . lady agree that one of the most pernicious impacts of the protocol is that in a few months , the european union will stop the veterinary medicines that are so vital to the health of animals in northern ireland coming over from great britain , because the eu insists that its veterinary agency should control these matters ? i agree wholeheartedly with the hon . member . the growing uncertainty over the availability of veterinary medicines in northern ireland because of the protocol poses a grave threat to the agri - food sector and animal welfare . if a permanent solution is not reached now , northern ireland risks losing access to more than 1,700 vital veterinary products , around 51 % of its current medicine portfolio , as per the british veterinary association ’s advice . that will have devastating consequences , not only for farmers and their livestock , but for consumers and companion animals such as cats , dogs and horses . without those essential medicines , animal health and disease control will be severely compromised , leaving our agricultural sector , and the broader public , exposed to significant risks . this is a 2024 problem , not a 2025 problem , and it needs a fix . we also have the unsatisfactory situation around the transport of second - hand farm machinery from great britain to northern ireland , due to requirements such as a phytosanitary certificate just because there might be soil on the wheels . we had the eleventh - hour u - turn on the uk - wide “ not for eu ” labelling policy , which demonstrated no sign of a willingness to mitigate the irish sea border — an outrageous move on the part of the government , but not surprising given the continued bending to the eu and big business . this government have demonstrated their complete disregard for northern ireland in that regard . we also have ongoing issues around potatoes and plants coming from scotland to northern ireland — the list goes on . those issues are far from resolved and need to be addressed . on top of those difficulties , our farming community is dealing with the rising cost of living , rising energy prices and volatile farmgate prices . i call on the government to ensure that funding for agriculture in northern ireland is adjusted in line with inflation , at around £ 389 million . our farmers need certainty , and that means a ring - fenced support package that extends beyond short - term budget cycles , ideally for at least 10 years . in conclusion , the message is clear : no farmers , no food . they need our support . rose — order . i will be calling the front - bench speakers at 6.50 pm , so chris hinchliff is the last voice from the back benches . i do not doubt the motivation of opposition members , but the inescapable fact is that the conservative party is ideologically incapable of putting forward real solutions to bolster our national food security . i share some of the concerns about the use of high - quality farmland for ground - mounted solar schemes , which is an ongoing issue in north east hertfordshire , and we need a land use framework to give strategic direction to where we generate the solar energy that we need , instead of allowing a chaotic proliferation of profit - driven schemes wherever grid capacity , which the conservative party failed to sort out , allows . under the previous government , just 5 % of houses had installed rooftop solar , and neither did they take any of the obvious steps to mandate solar panels on new build houses or car parks . for 14 years , they allowed that situation to develop unchecked , and it will be this labour government who deliver the land use strategy that we need to provide a framework to ensure that we are making the best possible use of our finite land . on other challenges , it is estimated that one third of uk soils are degraded , yet the previous government ditched the planned soil health action plan for england . on biodiversity , the previous conservative government authorised the use of harmful pesticides , despite knowing that that would have a devastating impact on pollinators . on new entrants , it is well known that the average age of farmers is too high , yet when it was in power the conservative party ’s austerity measures led to the closure of 15,000 acres of county farms estate , which is crucial for getting younger people into a farming career and contributing to national food security . i call the opposition spokesperson . food security is national security , and in a time of rising global uncertainty , we must support the british farmer and the british food and drink sector to deliver high - quality domestic food for our economy and our national security . that means providing farmers and growers with the certainty they deserve . unfortunately , in recent weeks and over the course of this debate , we have seen what happens when a member for one of the least rural constituencies in the country is put in charge of the countryside . some £ 50 million of the farming recovery fund is not yet paid out . some £ 75 million ring - fenced for internal drainage boards has not yet been distributed . there is no commitment on the £ 220 million for farm innovation and productivity grants . there are reports that the farming budget is about to be slashed , leaving uncertainty and farmers facing a cliff edge . while the first assault of this labour government has been on pensioners right across the country , i fear that farmers are next on their hit list . the secretary of state has had the chance in this debate to stand up for farmers and to confirm that the farming budget and other schemes will be protected . instead , he seems to have already surrendered to the chancellor , suggesting a cut of £ 100 million . i fear that it will be much more . as we know , labour could only bring itself to include 87 words in its manifesto on its plan for farmers , which stands in contrast to our conservative government ’s commitment to food security and our rural sector by putting food at the centre of policymaking . we introduced the food security index and an annual food security report , and we set out plans to introduce legally binding targets to enhance our food security . we established the farm to fork summit , held at downing street , bringing together key stakeholders from across the food and farming sector . that was all to ensure that the government ’s departments were aligned on this agenda . we were willing to look farmers in the eye , to engage directly with the whole agricultural sector and to make sure that its priorities were heard across the whole of government . i ask the minister : why is the prime minister not guaranteeing the same level of engagement and reporting ? i congratulate the new members who gave their maiden speeches : the hon . members for derbyshire dales ( john whitby ) , for south cotswolds ( dr savage ) and for brecon , radnor and cwm tawe ( david chadwick ) , as well as my friend , we have all collectively agreed in our speeches on the need for certainty right now for our farmers . at a time when farmers need to plan , labour is offering them a farming manifesto that could be placed on a postcard . that is exactly why we have had to secure this debate today , bringing ministers from the department to the chamber , all with the best interests of giving our new labour government the best chance to stand up for our farmers . in the past 100 days in office , we have seen that the secretary of state is too weak to stand up for our farmers and too weak to even stand up for his own department against the chancellor ’s red pen . as has been said , we have experienced the wettest 18 months on record . that can not go unanswered , and thousands of farmers across the country are being crippled by crop losses and damage to their fields . in fact , farmers are already fearing for their second year without any crop at all . the £ 50 million pledged by the last conservative government was designed specifically to support farmers hit by flooding , and it was ready to go when we left office . farmers on the ground , however , say that they have not seen a penny of it . where is that money ? why has it not been delivered to the farmers who desperately need it ? the previous secretary of state , my right hon . friend labour has a choice in the debate and in bringing forward the budget this month . my advice to the secretary of state is to pick up the phone , speak to the chancellor , back british farming , fight for the farming budget in full and deliver for farmers up and down the country . i am grateful to have the opportunity to close the debate . we have heard some excellent first speeches from new members today , and i want to pay tribute to them . from my hon . friend we heard from we also had excellent speeches from a range of people . my hon . friend my hon . friend i have to say that , from listening to conservative members , they do not seem to have grasped the level of their own failure . the conservative government failed farmers and rural communities . we have heard about low levels of confidence , 12,000 businesses going out of business , and input costs and energy costs spiralling . that is why rural communities voted them out in their droves . it will be very different in the future . we have heard the complaints about budgets for the future . i am sure that right hon . and hon . members on the opposition benches have the experience to know how spending reviews work . they will find out in time where the money is . but , of course , given that they spent the money many times over , they know the problems that we are having to clear up . what we have heard is the need for stability in the future to overcome the economic problems that we have inherited from their failed government . farmers are the backbone of rural communities , our environment and our economy , but they face multiple challenges from flooding and droughts to soaring input costs and rural crime . we need a proper long - term strategy that works . we will do away with the sticking - plaster approach that we have seen for the last few years and replace it with a new deal for farmers that genuinely will boost farmers ’ resilience in the face of climate change and wider external shocks . we will work in partnership with farmers , listen to their concerns and their ideas and tackle the root causes of the long - term issues that they continue to face . only after those discussions and considerations will it be possible to deliver the changes that farmers really want to see . in summary , that will be a long - term approach — a labour approach . that approach will be good for farms , good for consumers , good for the environment and good for nature — frankly , a real change from the short - term , quick - fix operators now deservedly relegated to the opposition benches . question put . the house divided : ayes 187 , noes 359 . question accordingly negatived . this petition mirrors the one that i delivered to downing street yesterday , with 108,000 signatures . it seeks to protect the darwin oak , a veteran tree which is 550 years old , at shelton rough , outside shrewsbury , in a green space where charles darwin himself played frequently as a child . it is one of hundreds of trees that are threatened with felling should the proposed north - west relief road scheme go ahead in my constituency . that would not only lead to a significant loss of biodiversity and carbon capability , but would breach the government ’s national planning policy framework , and would also mean a huge loss of green space that is currently used for the wellbeing of shrewsbury residents . the petition states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to work with shropshire council to safeguard the darwin oak tree … and ensure its preservation for future generations . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the united kingdom , declares that the darwin oak , a 550 - year old oak tree , is threatened with felling by the proposed north west relief road scheme at shrewsbury ; further declares that the loss of large - canopy , open - grown trees like the darwin oak would amount to a significant loss of biodiversity and carbon sequestration capability ; further that the proposed felling of hundreds of trees , including numerous veteran trees and the darwin oak , goes against the government ’s national planning policy framework and the ‘ keepers of time ’ policy ; and further that the proposed felling of trees would lead to a huge loss of green space used for exercise and the well - being of shrewsbury residents . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to work with shropshire council to safeguard the darwin oak tree as part of the north west relief road scheme and ensure its preservation for future generations . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p003010 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(anna mcmorrin . ) i am grateful for the opportunity to debate this important subject . i thank the minister for being here this evening , and i thank everyone i spoke to before the debate , particularly the bridlington health forum and representatives of local nhs trusts and the integrated care board . bridlington is not alone in needing improved access to health services , but i will seek to explain today why that has become an extremely acute problem in the town . constituents of mine living in and around driffield , hornsea , market weighton and the remote wolds villages will have valid concerns about their own public services , but i hope they will forgive me for taking this opportunity to speak in depth about bridlington and why it is in so much need of extra support . i will describe the demographic backdrop against which these issues have arisen , the challenges over supply of services , and , lastly , the need for a robust strategy to tackle the various problems faced by local people in the town . bridlington is a fantastic coastal resort on the edge of the rolling hills of the wolds , and it welcomes millions of visitors every year . it is world famous for its seabird colony , and is the lobster capital of europe . however , like many seaside towns it has significant challenges , and the demographic data is stark . it has the oldest and most deprived population in the east riding of yorkshire , and men living in the bridlington south ward have a life expectancy 10 years lower than those living elsewhere in the county . indeed , data shows that two of the three wards covering the town are the two most deprived in the county , and the other is the fifth highest of a total of 26 . the age profile is equally stark . one third of the population are over 65 , and that rises to 44 % of residents in bridlington north , where a significant number are over 80 . bridlington has the highest percentage of people with limiting long - term illness or disability in the york and scarborough nhs trust catchment area , and bridlington residents have the highest levels of health inequality in that catchment . the director of public health for east riding of yorkshire county council has said of the town : “ we have found that the inequalities are growing , they ’re large and they ’re serious . in terms of length of life , quality of life and the amount of people with long term health conditions , bridlington has got the worst levels in all of the east riding … so this is a wake up call to do something about it . ” i certainly can not disagree with that sentiment . as for the supply of health services , the house will no doubt be shocked to hear that there are entire classrooms of children in bridlington who have never seen a dentist . one patient needing emergency dental work was sent more than 60 miles to doncaster , and in january there were 8,500 people on the waiting list for the only local nhs dentist . many people have been forced to go private , but that is not a solution affordable to most . will the minister agree to look again at nhs dental contracts , so that they incentivise dentists to open practices in areas where there is such a clear and obvious shortage ? access to primary care has seen some recent improvements , but the consolidation of gp practices from six to two has not been without its problems . local patients still find it challenging to secure appointments at one of the two practices , but i know that gps operating across the town have worked tirelessly to improve services in the wake of the pandemic and the shortage of local healthcare professionals . the direction of travel for secondary care , however , is not positive . bridlington is blessed with a fantastic hospital site , which opened in 1989 . it recently enjoyed an investment of £ 4.7 million in 1,500 solar panels , making it one of the greenest nhs sites in the country . however , the site is chronically underused . i am not suggesting for a second that the bridlington hospital site could be a major trauma centre or large infirmary , but it can and should be a vital community asset for health . it has the potential to be a health hub for the town , bringing together a wide array of local health services . york and scarborough nhs trust might not be the owner of the site , but it is the provider of secondary care there . many people in the town feel that its focus , which is naturally leaning towards north yorkshire and not east yorkshire , means that investment and new services are being prioritised in york , scarborough and malton . out - patient appointments are a particularly key metric , as they make up a large bulk of the interactions between the nhs and older people in bridlington . the number of out - patient appointments at bridlington hospital that are offered to residents in bridlington , driffield and the surrounding area has reduced from 46,500 in 2019 - 20 to just over 27,500 in 2023 - 24 — a reduction of more than 35 % in just four years . ophthalmology appointments are down , audiology appointments are down and rheumatology appointments are down . instead of recognising that an ageing population will result in greater demand for out - patient services locally , we are seeing these services being provided at sites away from the town . i commend the hon . gentleman for bringing forward this issue . he and i knew each other long before he came to this house , as he was one of our advisers for the all - party parliamentary group for eggs , pigs and poultry . it is a real pleasure to see him in this place , and we look forward to his contributions . the hon . gentleman ’s constituency and my constituency are very similar . he mentioned that bridlington is a seaside resort and that he represents seaside areas , as do i. he also mentioned the fact that much of the population is over 70 years old — again , there are similarities with my constituency . is the hon . gentleman seeking a new rural strategy that addresses this issue in coastal areas ? if he is , it is something we can all welcome . i thank the hon . member for his contribution . i will come to that point shortly . east riding patients travelled an astonishing 2.7 million nhs miles to attend out - patient appointments in 2023 - 24 , and two thirds of bridlington residents attend out - patient appointments away from the town . that is not acceptable , and i will not stand by and let it continue . however , part of the problem is that local members of parliament have very little , if any , direct influence over the direction of our health services , which is why i am appealing to the minister for his support . i believe that this is particularly timely . in his recent report , lord darzi described the nhs as “ broken ” , and in the case of bridlington he is correct . he states that : “ an ageing population is the most significant driver of increased healthcare needs since it is associated with the development of long - term conditions ” and that “ by the time people are aged 65 - 74 , a majority will have at least one long - term condition and some 40 per cent will have two or more . by the time people are aged 75 - 84 , this rises to nearly 60 per cent having two or more , and by the time people are aged 85 or above , 9 out of 10 will have at least one long - term condition . ” i remind the house that one third of residents in bridlington are over 65 . lord darzi makes the following very pertinent observation : “ at the highest level , the nhs has had the strategic intention to shift spending from reactive care in hospitals to more proactive care in the community setting — but care has in fact moved in the other direction . ” that is very much the experience of my constituents . the report also makes it clear that “ care should be more joined up , or more ‘ integrated’ … to reflect the fact the people living with long - term conditions ” need more support and “ a variety of different physical and mental health professionals and often rely on social care too . the frequency of their interactions with the health service means that their care is more complex and therefore requires coordination . ” finally on this point , lord darzi is right to say that “ care should be delivered in the community , closer to where people live and work ” , and that “ hospitals should be reserved for specialist care . this is more convenient for patients — especially for those with long - term conditions who will need contact with the nhs more frequently . ” i would also like to refer the house to the chief medical officer ’s 2021 annual report on health in coastal communities . in this insightful piece of work , sir chris whitty noted : “ given the known high rates of preventable illness in these areas , the lack of available data on the health of coastal communities has been striking whilst researching the report . coastal communities have been long overlooked with limited research on their health and wellbeing . the focus has tended towards inner city or rural areas with too little attention given to the nation ’s periphery . ” he went on to add : “ data is rarely published at a geographical level granular enough to capture coastal outcomes , with most data only available at local authority or clinical commissioning group ( ccg ) level . as a result , deprivation and ill health at the coast is hidden by relative affluence just inland which is lumped together . ” in conclusion , he recommended : “ given the health and wellbeing challenges of coastal communities have more in common with one another than inland neighbours , there should be a national strategy to improve the health and wellbeing of coastal communities . ” unfortunately , and perhaps as a result of the health service working its way through the impact of the pandemic , the report has been somewhat sidelined and the recommendations have yet to be acted upon , so what should be the solution ? we need a comprehensive strategy , bringing together all parts of the health service , that recognises the challenges and put together an immediate action plan . the humber and north yorkshire integrated care board is trying to address these issues , but i am concerned about exactly what its role is , or should be . some icbs interpret their population health duties as requiring them to act upstream of healthcare needs on the social determinants of health , where the nhs has few direct levers . other icbs interpret their duties as requiring them to understand and adjust healthcare services to match the needs of the population that they serve , in line with the nhs operating framework . some interpret them as both and others as neither , preferring to focus on what they see as their traditional role of performance managing providers . ultimately , their roles and responsibilities need to be clarified so that they can be better held to account . this is not a criticism of the performance of my local icb , which is working hard to tackle the challenges , but i think we would all benefit from greater clarity of purpose . in conclusion , we can not escape what is in front of us . as one senior local authority figure commented to me : “ the health crisis in bridlington is not a car crash waiting to happen , it is happening right now . ” my appeal to the minister today is simple . i have no doubt that he has the very best of intentions when it comes to improving the nation ’s health , but realistically many of those ambitions will take decades . if he wants to make a real difference today , will he please focus some of his department ’s collective effort on tackling the enormous health inequalities in seaside towns such as bridlington , and will he please take the recommendations of lord darzi and sir chris whitty and apply them to our town ? we are happy to be his pilot scheme or his trailblazer . i know that with the right energy and direction , we will not be left with a generation of children who have never seen a dentist and we will not have elderly people travelling long distances for regular routine appointments . instead , we will have a health service to be proud of and a happier and healthier local population . i implore the minister and his department to work with me to ensure a better future for the brilliant people of bridlington . i congratulate this government are committed to fixing our broken health and care system . as my right hon . friend the secretary of state has said , we will be honest about the problems facing the nhs and serious about tackling them . the hon . gentleman is absolutely right to raise the problems in bridlington , which sadly will be familiar to colleagues right across the house . the truth is that we are very far from where we need and want to be , as he so rightly set out . he talked a lot about lord darzi ’s report , and i am pleased that he has read it and appears to agree with the true extent of the challenges it sets out . even lord darzi , with all his years of experience , was shocked by what he discovered . the report is vital because it gives us the frank assessment we need to face the problems honestly and properly . it will take a decade of national renewal , lasting reform and a long - term plan to save our nhs . we have committed to three big shifts : from hospital to community ; from analogue to digital ; and from sickness to prevention . our 10 - year plan will set out how we will deliver those shifts to ensure that we have a health and care system that is fit for the future , in bridlington and across the united kingdom . to develop that plan , we must have a meaningful conversation with the public and those who work in the health system . we will conduct a comprehensive range of engagement and consultation activities , launching very soon , bringing in views from the public , the health and care workforce , national and local stakeholders and system leaders . importantly , given the hon . gentleman ’s comments , parliamentarians will also have an opportunity to feed into this important national conversation . it will be the biggest national conversation about our health and care system since the nhs ’s foundation in 1948 . the government are committed to restoring our health and care system to its founding promise that it will be there for all our constituents when they need it . i hope that context helps the hon . gentleman to understand that we are taking this very seriously , and that we do not want to make policy in the ivory towers of westminster or whitehall . this needs to be a national conversation , feeding into a 10 - year plan that will be published in the spring of next year . i will now address some of the hon . gentleman ’s specific points . first , i share his concern about dentistry access . the single biggest cause of children aged between five and nine being admitted to hospital is to have their rotten teeth taken out , which is frankly a disgrace . as the prime minister said a few weeks ago , it is soul - destroying for those young people , and it can so easily be prevented . that is why we will work with the sector to reform the dental contract , with a focus on prevention and the retention of nhs dentists . in the meantime , we know that patients can not wait . we will not wait to make improvements to increase access in the current system . that is why we are working to deliver our rescue plan to provide 700,000 more urgent dental appointments . these will be available across the country , including , of course , for the residents of bridlington . i am aware that an initial procurement for the additional service in bridlington was unsuccessful . the icb has since reviewed the specification and is working to further understand what may work best for the town , with preferred options for procurement due to be approved this month . unfortunately , people across the country will recognise the picture that the hon . gentleman describes of gp access in bridlington . almost everywhere , patients are finding it increasingly difficult to see a gp . when they can not get an appointment , the chances are that they will end up in accident and emergency . this is unacceptable , as it is worse for patients and more expensive for the taxpayer . lord darzi is clear that the situation is particularly acute in certain areas — that speaks to the hon . gentleman ’s point about health inequalities — and bridlington is one such area . our plan starts with recruiting over 1,000 newly qualified gps through an £ 82 million boost to the additional roles reimbursement scheme . in the longer term , we are committed to training thousands more gps , guaranteeing face - to - face appointments for all those who want one , delivering a modern appointment booking system to avoid the 8 am scramble and , ultimately , shifting resources from acute care into primary and community care . the hon . gentleman raised the recent merger of gp practices in bridlington , where six practices have been consolidated into two larger practices . these decisions are , of course , made by local commissioners , who determine what services and care pathways best serve the needs of patients in the area . i am pleased that performance has improved in both practices , with one demonstrating some of the best access within the integrated care board footprint . of course , there are still issues , and the people of bridlington deserve better , which is why we are committed to delivering our plan for primary care . the hon . gentleman also mentioned bridlington hospital , which currently provides a range of services , including an urgent treatment centre , radiology , rehabilitation , in - patient surgical wards and out - patient clinics . patients attending those services can , and often do , come from outside the bridlington area . i am aware that there is more space at the hospital that can be used , and i can assure him that we are looking carefully at capital requirements as part of the spending review . we will know more about that on i hope i have addressed some of the hon . gentleman ’s concerns . i absolutely agree with his view about health inequalities , and it is quite shocking to hear the difference between one ward and another in his constituency . those gaps have to be narrowed , and a lot of this is about ensuring that people are not only living longer but living healthier lives . the increase in complex conditions that we are now seeing at younger ages is creating huge pressure on our health system , and it is not good for his constituents either . i absolutely understand and see the context in which we are operating , and that is a top priority for the 10 - year health plan we are bringing forward . in conclusion , i thank the hon . gentleman for bringing forward the issue and giving me the opportunity to reiterate from the government dispatch box our promise to fix our broken health and care system and deliver for people in bridlington and across yorkshire . sadly , the situation he describes resonates with the broader findings of lord darzi ’s review . the health and care system is in a critical condition , but i assure him that this government are committed to getting our healthcare system back on its feet and fit for the future . on the particular issue of coastal towns , bridlington is not unique in the challenges it faces . will the minister pledge to look at the broader recommendations in sir chris whitty ’s report of 2021 ? the hon . gentleman makes an important point . one of the trends we are seeing is that an older demographic is moving to coastal towns . those towns are often most the challenged because they are under - doctored , dental deserts and lacking in social care facilities . a toxic combination is caused by the additional pressures brought by that demographic and a lack of the required facilities on the supply side . the hon . gentleman is right to identify the issue of coastal towns . i know our chief medical officer , chris whitty , is alive to the issue , and it will have to be factored into the 10 - year plan . the 10 - year plan can not just be about the sectors we are looking at ; it is also about geography and the lived experience of people in particular parts of the country . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i am honoured to speak for the first time in this house as the member of parliament for tipton , wednesbury and coseley . i represent the village of coseley in dudley , as well as the towns of tipton , wednesbury and hateley heath in sandwell . in the last parliament , shaun bailey was a tireless advocate for this special corner of the black country , and i wish him well as he resumes his legal studies . let me tell you about tipton , wednesbury and coseley . we are an industrial constituency , shaped by factories , foundries , mines and canals . we have beautiful parks , laid out for the leisure of working people , and civic buildings of grace and gravitas , such as the grade ii listed tipton central library and the 16th - century st bart ’s in wednesbury . but more than anything , we have the people of the black country — creative , ingenious , hard - working and down to earth people like thomas barratt . born in coseley , he stopped the enemy advance and saved his patrol at ypres . he was a boilermaker , awarded the victoria cross posthumously at just 22 . the workers of tube town , the metal finishing capital of the world , went out on strike for two long months in 1913 for a decent wage . they were backed all the way by their wives , heroes in their own right , who somehow kept 25,000 families fed amid near destitution . they won . i am proud to say that their union became my union , unite . workers have come to the constituency from ireland , the caribbean , bangladesh , kashmir and punjab ; they left their homes to provide for their families , facing racism but prevailing , building churches , temples , mosques and gurdwaras , and seeing their children succeed . we are a proud , working - class community . too often , people have stood in this place and talked our area down . i will never . of course , the name “ black country ” is for the smoke of heavy industry ; there has been coalmining , steel fabrication , metal finishing , and nail , brick and chain making . we are where the industrial revolution started . james watt ’s first steam engine hauled coal in tipton , at the bloomfield colliery . today , despite everything , a quarter of all workers in our area are still in manufacturing . we may be the black country , but modern manufacturing is clean , high - skill and high - wage . in sandwell , 1,000 firms — with 21,000 jobs — make everything , from street furniture to hinges to locks to the precision metal forming for aeroplanes and power plants . i am proud to wear the “ made in britain ” badge , and to back our new deal for working people . if we are to have a new industrial revolution here in the uk as we meet the challenge of climate change , let us make it with our hands and our brains , in the place that was the crucible of the first industrial revolution , the black country . i stand for no more and no less than this : prosperity for every family . my friends at the tuc worked out that if wages had risen in the last decade by the amount by which they rose between 1997 and 2010 , the average worker in my constituency would be £ 93 a week better off . that is nearly five grand a year more in people ’s pockets . in the black country , we work hard , but forces bigger than any individual — deindustrialisation , thatcherism , and the cruel austerity of these last 14 years — mean that good folk there earn less and have fewer chances and fewer choices than people elsewhere . fully half of our kids grow up below the poverty line , in infested b&bs , in homes with damp dripping down the walls , or in flats made for two , but home to three times that . for many , most weeks , the money stretches , just about — until the week when it does not . i want to turn the thoughts of those in this house to the young people in my constituency , almost none of whom go to fee - paying schools . four in 10 kids in my constituency did not get grade 4 gcse in maths and english last year . that has to change , and we will change it . as i stand here today , the obstacles to delivering prosperity , and more than that — comfort , security , leisure — to every worker and every family seem almost insurmountable , but we take heart from our history : from ernie bevin , who forged the working - class women and men of the uk into an industrial machine that , from a standing start , equipped our country for victory . in my area , those in saucepan factories made grenades , and car makers built the machines to defeat fascism . that is a reminder that once we turn our minds to something , the ingenuity and drive of the british working class can rarely be equalled . it is for us , here , to set it free . i will always stand against decline and for progress . after all , i grew up in a world where people like me could not get married , but now our beloved daughter has both her mothers ’ names on her birth certificate . to believe in progress is to believe that once again this country can work for working people . it is time , madam deputy speaker , so my final words are to the people of our towns . tipton , coseley , wednesbury , hateley heath : i am here to serve you always .