on a point of order , mr speaker . you , like me , have long been a supporter of britain ’s nuclear test veterans , so i wonder whether you could advise me . given that government lawyers have finally admitted , after 73 years of denial , that tests may have taken place at the time that those veterans were in the south atlantic — they say that “ information may have been recorded by scientists carrying out radiation monitoring ” — surely a statement in the house by a government minister is required . how can i facilitate that ? the secretary of state was asked — what assessment he has made with cabinet colleagues of the higher education challenges in scotland . i know members across the house will join me in paying our respects to his holiness pope francis . i offer my sincere condolences to scotland ’s catholic community who have this easter lost a much loved and compassionate leader . just before the easter recess , i had the privilege of leading the uk government delegation to washington dc , then on to tartan week in new york . the trip was a key part of my drive to promote brand scotland around the world , to boost economic growth and to create jobs here at home . finally , mr speaker , to you , to members across the house and to scotland ’s closest and most important neighbours , happy st george ’s day . i call dr scott arthur . before you do so , mr speaker , i had better answer his question . [ laughter . ] too excited about st george ’s day so i am , mr speaker . we should all be proud of scotland ’s universities , the contribution they make to scotland ’s public life and their reputation as the best in the world , but 18 years of the scottish national party have left some of those proud institutions in dire straits . job cuts and course closures are the inevitable product of the snp ’s decision to deliver a 22 % real terms cut to scottish student funding since 2013 . scotland ’s universities , their staff and their students all need a scottish government with a proper plan to turn this crisis around ; they need a new direction with scottish labour . i thank the secretary for state for his answer and for his comments about the pope . i make my response within the context of my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests and i note my membership of the university and college union . the university sector in scotland has never been in a worse state . it is in a state of crisis , with job losses , both compulsory and voluntary , being contemplated across the whole sector in scotland . it is young scots who are paying the price . to balance the books , the scottish government are limiting the number of young scots who can go to university , forcing universities to rely more and more on the recruitment of students from overseas . to be clear , that means that scots are often sitting at home unable to access a place because students from overseas with lower qualifications are getting those places . does the secretary of state agree that scotland ’s young people must be supported and the university sector must be fully funded in scotland ? i thank my hon . friend for his question and for what he does to support higher education in scotland . thanks to the snp ’s higher education financial crisis , as my hon . friend says , too many scottish students are missing out on places . labour has committed to ensuring that scottish students from all backgrounds can access university , and that can only be achieved with a new funding settlement that both protects our world - leading universities and gives any scottish student who wants to pursue university the opportunity to do so . i am proud to have made it from wester hailes education centre , in the wester hailes scheme , to the university of edinburgh , but that story is becoming all too rare under the snp government . it is time for a new direction for scottish universities . i call the shadow secretary of state . i associate myself with the secretary of state ’s remarks about the passing of his holiness pope francis . i also wish all those not fortunate enough to have been born north of hadrian ’s wall a very happy st george ’s day . while he is not a graduate of the university of aberdeen , like me the secretary of state is a beneficiary of a scottish university education . scotland has some of the finest and most respected higher education establishments in the world , but as we saw last week at the university of aberdeen , in warnings from the university of edinburgh and , most starkly , at the university of dundee , where over 600 jobs are being shed to make emergency savings , the current funding model , overseen by the snp , is failing our institutions and our young people . i know we agree on that , but will the secretary of state also acknowledge the devastating impact on scottish university budgets of his own government ’s national insurance increase , adding £ 45 million to their salary bills , or will he continue to defend that job - killing , anti - growth tax on workers ? the shadow secretary of state is defending the snp ’s dreadful record on higher education in scotland . it is clear from the principal of the university of edinburgh , sir peter mathieson , that the problems the university is having to deal with are caused by the underfunding of students from scotland , which has meant the books have had to be balanced with an ever - increasing number of international students . the number of international students at the university of edinburgh , for example , is still going up , although not as high as projected , and that is the major cause of the financial problems at scottish universities . the conservatives would do well not to hide behind the snp and support it in that process . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . i associate myself with the secretary of state ’s comments about the death of pope francis . in a rare consensus , i agree with much of what has been said by both the secretary of state and the shadow secretary of state . many universities are extremely concerned about the funding situation . many of my constituents who are employees of universities or who have children at scottish universities are concerned , particularly following the news of the 600 job cuts at the university of dundee . i have spoken to the principal of the university of edinburgh and he is also concerned about the funding model in scotland , which is failing everyone . will the secretary of state discuss with the scottish government how they can make changes and put pressure on them to do so ? the national insurance changes are not helpful , so it would help scottish education if we had some changes there as well . the hon . lady ’s question is slightly contradictory . on the one hand , she does not like the national insurance contribution increase , which has given the scottish government a £ 4.9 billion boost — the highest settlement in the history of devolution . that money should be going to the frontline of higher education , but it is not . on the other hand , she talks about a more generous funding settlement for universities . she can not have it both ways . the funding model must change , and the scotland office is in touch with all our universities ’ principals to see how we can work through this issue . this is a problem with the funding of higher education as a result of snp policies and the scottish government . i associate myself with the comments about the devastating loss of pope francis and the compassion that he showed to the most vulnerable in our society . on a happier note , i wish all friends and family a very happy st george ’s day . i also note my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests in relation to higher education . the secretary of state will know that the biggest financial impacts on higher education in scotland have been westminster policies , which is why the sector in the uk faces some challenges . we have the national insurance increase , brexit , which i know he passionately opposed — or used to , anyway — and the hostile environment . labour found common ground with michael gove on sticking him into the house of lords , but it also found common ground with him on his commitment to decentralising migration . that has had a particular impact on the higher education sector , not least in dundee , which has had the biggest financial hit . will the secretary of state let us know what progress he has made on that commitment by scottish labour ? may i give the hon . gentleman and all his snp colleagues our deepest condolences on the loss of christina mckelvie ? i think this is the first time that we have had scottish questions since then . i say again that the hon . gentleman and his snp colleagues voted against the budget , which delivered an extra £ 4.9 billion for public services in scotland . some of that should have gone to frontline services , including to ensuring that our higher education sector was funded properly in the scottish context . the snp is very good at blaming everybody else for powers that do not belong to it , but what it should actually do is get a mirror . in the last seven days , the only increase it has made in using the budget given to it is £ 20,000 on the salaries of scottish government ministers , who have all singularly failed . i thank the secretary of state for his kind remarks about the sad loss of christina mckelvie . i also note the kind remarks made by the prime minister ; the whole party is grateful for them . since the labour government do not want to talk about their commitments , let me help them out a little . we have time this friday to discuss scotland ’s migration needs , with a bill backed by the care , hospitality and tourism sectors . internationalisation in education and research is crucial , so in a spirit of collegiality , instead of pandering to reform as scottish labour too often does on migration and our relationship with the eu , will the secretary of state work with us ahead of the bill on friday so that we can find some common cause to help the higher education sector ? there is complete denial about the problems in the higher education sector , which is devolved to the scottish government . we have made it clear that the immigration system we inherited from the previous government is not working , that net migration is too high and that the interaction between migration and skills in the labour market is broken , so confidence in the whole system needs to be rebuilt . work is under way in government to link the work of skills england and its equivalents , the migration advisory committee , the industrial strategy council and the department for work and pensions to form a new framework to identify sectors that either do or do not have the adequate workforce , as well as skills strategies for the future workforce . there has been an overreliance on international recruitment . lots of young people in scotland — nearly one in six — are not in education , employment or training . that is a shambles . it should be scotland ’s shame , and we need to do something about it . whether he has had recent discussions with the scottish government on the implementation of cancer strategies . i commend the hon . member for the consistent attention he has paid to this issue since he was elected last year and for educating us on it . cancer remains scotland ’s biggest killer , with cancer research uk reporting that scots are receiving worse cancer treatment than their neighbours in other parts of the uk . the national cancer plan for england will save lives that would otherwise be lost to cancer and deliver improved care and patient experience . last year , a uk labour budget delivered the biggest settlement for scottish public services in the history of devolution . it is time for the scottish government to step up and get serious about cancer . i thank the minister for her reply and very kind remarks . as in wales and england , not a single nhs board in scotland is meeting the 62 - day cancer waiting time standard . that is a legacy of under - investment from the snp in scotland , from labour in wales , and from the conservatives in england . to develop change and save lives , we need proper funding for cancer services . how will the secretary of state for scotland ensure that his colleagues at the department of health and social care understand the importance of fully funding cancer strategies to avoid disasters like that devised by the snp ? i assure the hon . member that this is a priority for the government , but as healthcare is a devolved matter , the scottish government are responsible for their own cancer strategies , including diagnostic services in scotland . in england , improving early diagnosis of cancer — including breast cancer — is a priority for the uk government , who are committed to transforming diagnostic services and will support the nhs to meet the demand for diagnostic services through investment in new capacity , including mri and ct scanners . my constituent stephen found out that he had prostate cancer almost by accident when he was treated for something else . thankfully , it was diagnosed early and he is on his way to a good outcome . despite prostate cancer being the most common cancer for men in scotland , it is not one of the tumour types that has been promoted for early diagnosis in the current scottish government cancer strategy . will the minister encourage the scottish government to make specific reference to prostate cancer when promoting early diagnosis ? i commend my hon . friend for her commitment to her constituents , and pass on the best wishes of the whole house to stephen in his recovery . her constituents , like mine , are constantly on the receiving end of late diagnoses because of the underfunding of cancer services that what recent discussions he has had with the scottish government on the impact of the barnett formula on funding for the nhs in scotland . thanks to the barnett formula , a labour chancellor and 37 scottish labour mps , scotland ’s public services have received the biggest ever financial settlement from the uk government , but how has the snp spent it ? well , despite the best efforts of our extraordinary nhs staff , every week , thousands of scots will wait more than eight hours in a&e , and more than 100,000 scots have been stuck on an nhs waiting list for over a year . doctors , nurses and — most of all — scottish patients have been failed by 18 years of snp mismanagement . we desperately need a new direction . there has been a noticeable increase in the number of people contacting my office about accessing gp services , and about long waiting times for hospital appointments and operations . those who live in the isle of arran and actually get an appointment often can not get to it , because they can not get a ferry there and back on the same day . that is a different point , but as a former manager in the nhs , i have seen the consequences of the shortage of gps in scotland . there has been a recent successful recruitment campaign in different parts of england ; does the minister agree that it is time for the scottish government to utilise the barnett consequentials in order to improve access to nhs services in scotland through robust workforce planning , and to follow the example of the nhs in england and get gps successfully recruited ? i thank my hon . friend , not just for her service to her constituents but her previous service in the nhs . as she has noted , thanks to labour , nhs waiting lists in england have fallen month on month , because this government have a plan and we have invested . sadly , it is a completely different story in scotland , as she has pointed out . like mine , her constituents see a situation in which almost one in six people are now stuck on a waiting list . john swinney has announced this snp government ’s fifth nhs recovery plan in less than four years , but patients and staff know that it is not good enough , and we need a new direction . the minister is right to speak of the wonderful nhs staff that we have , but she also speaks of a new direction that is required . let me give the house a clue as to what new direction she might be speaking of . the good law project revealed this month that more than 60 % of donations to labour ’s health secretary , totalling £ 372,000 , came from individuals and companies linked to the private healthcare sector . as the same labour health secretary is so fond of saying , all roads lead to westminster , including on nhs funding . with cuts to public services coming down the line , is the secretary of state — or the minister — worried about the influence of private health donors on cabinet colleagues ? the hon . gentleman says that there have been cuts to public services . let me put on record once again that this labour government pledged to end austerity , and we have , with a record settlement for scotland ’s public services . that money has been squandered by the snp government , such that we are still in a situation where nearly one in six scots are on a waiting list . south of the border , waiting lists have fallen for the fifth month in a row . that is the difference made by a labour government with a plan and a willingness to fund it . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of not issuing new north sea oil and gas licences on levels of economic growth in scotland . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of not issuing new north sea oil and gas licences on levels of economic growth in scotland . i am proud of the enormous contribution north sea workers have made to our country . oil and gas will be an important part of our energy mix for decades to come . we have a workforce who lead the world , and we are determined to secure their long - term future in the energy industry , including oil and gas . the uk government will soon respond to our recent consultation on supporting the energy transition in the north sea , and i am in the north - east tomorrow , turning on a wind farm and also meeting leaders in the oil and gas sector . if the uk achieves net zero in 2050 , we will still consume about 14 billion barrels of oil and gas a year . we are currently on track to produce 4 billion barrels a year . will the secretary of state explain why he prefers to import our energy , rather than produce it ourselves ? the national mission of this labour government is to get to clean power by 2030 , but that means three things : renewable power , nuclear power , and oil and gas . as i have said already , oil and gas will be with us in the scottish and uk context for decades to come . a recent report by offshore energies uk showed that if the uk oil and gas basin continued to be used until 2050 , it could produce half our oil and gas needs . that would do wonders for jobs in the north - east of scotland , the north - east economy , our energy security and the energy transition , and it would also bring in £ 12 billion to the treasury . on top of that , it would bring in £ 150 billion of economic growth to the uk , which i am sure everyone in this house and the government would welcome . will the secretary of state please have a word with the energy secretary and ask him to stop his policies , which are continuing to ruin our oil and gas sector , and for once back north - east scotland ? on the oil and gas sector in 2050 , i have already mentioned at the dispatch box , as has the secretary of state for energy security and net zero , that oil and gas will be with us for decades to come , including to 2050 . does my right hon . friend agree that there is an opportunity for significant economic growth in scotland from getting right a just transition from oil and gas to clean power ? in my constituency , the landing space at the port of leith previously used by the oil and gas sector has been transformed by investment from forth ports into the largest renewable hub in scotland . will he join me in welcoming this investment in leith , and will he outline how his department will help secure every job possible in the transition from oil and gas ? i commend my hon . friend on the work she is doing , particularly in the port of leith , to ensure that we can have the transition and have it well . she highlights the important thing about this issue and debate : the energy mix requires us to have renewable power and clean energy by 2030 , but it also requires us to have nuclear power and oil and gas . the energy mix means that we do it all ; it is not either / or . the secretary of state rightly outlines how important the oil and gas sector is to scotland , and to the workers and businesses that rely on it , but if we are to have a truly just transition , we need to invest in new technologies such as hydrogen . will he , therefore , join me in welcoming the shortlisting of the selms muir hydrogen project in livingston for uk government support , and outline how that will benefit my constituency ? on i call the shadow secretary of state . does the secretary of state agree with the scottish labour leader , who says there is no question but that there has to be new oil and gas , or does he agree with his colleague the energy secretary , who has banned new licences in the north sea and is overseeing the accelerating decline of the uk ’s oil and gas basin ? the energy secretary and his department are involved in a consultation on the just transition at the moment , but i go back to my earlier answers : if we are to get clean power by 2030 and to have an energy mix in this country , we require oil and gas , we require renewables and we require nuclear . it is a simple process . i think we all heard that , and i am sure anas sarwar did . the secretary of state was unable to agree with his own leader in scotland , and is so in hock to the uk labour party that he can not stand up for scottish workers or the scottish oil and gas industry . it has always been the party interest over the national interest for labour , with no notice taken of the scottish labour party . ten years ago , the scottish labour party was described by its own leader as being simply the “ branch office ” . nothing has changed , has it ? the government ’s sole purpose initially , in their first few months in office , was to clear up the mess that the hon . gentleman ’s party left in this country , including the £ 22 billion black hole . we will get on with delivering our missions , including clean power by 2030 . that is what we are focused on , because that is what is good for jobs , good for bills and good for the environment . what assessment he has made of the adequacy of support available to scottish plant and seed nurseries to sell products to northern ireland . under the windsor framework arrangements , the northern ireland plant health label allows growers and traders to move plants and seeds for planting from great britain to northern ireland without a phytosanitary certificate , and scottish businesses have benefited from that . for example , more than 1,500 tonnes of previously prohibited seed potatoes , mostly from scottish traders , were moved to northern ireland from great britain last year . as the minister will know , according to mcintyre fruit in scotland , which also sells plants , it is easier to supply japan than to send plants to coleman ’s garden centre in my constituency , and the same company is now seeing orders cancelled in northern ireland . at the weekend , ewing ’s seafoods , northern ireland ’s oldest fishmonger , had a 40 - foot container filled with hundreds of thousands of pounds of fresh fish returned from belfast to scotland owing to administrative paperwork errors on seven boxes . will the minister , or the secretary of state , meet me and representatives of those companies to discuss what can be done to ease the bureaucratic burden on both northern ireland and scottish business ? i would be delighted to meet the hon . gentleman , but let me reassure him : the horticultural working group , co - chaired by senior officials from the department for environment , food and rural affairs and the cabinet office , was set up specifically to tackle issues involving the movement of seeds to consumers in northern ireland as a first priority . the hon . gentleman has also mentioned other topics , and i should be happy to meet him to discuss them , too . the working group meets regularly to address such issues , and includes representatives of the ulster farmers union , the national farmers union and the horticultural trades association , as well as business leaders and representatives of a small number of other horticultural businesses . scotland produces world - class potatoes , which are supplied to our iconic fish and chip shops , such as the real food café and the green welly stop in tyndrum , vincenzo ’s fish and chips in stirling — its fish supper won an award last year — and corrieri ’s in causewayhead ; robert and peter corrieri will retire this year after decades of service . will the minister recognise their value to our local economies , and assure me that more can be done to support the supply chains linking scottish growers with these much - loved businesses ? as my hon . friend knows , potatoes are a staple of our national dish , haggis , neeps and tatties . they are also a staple of my favourite breakfast , the dry potato scone . i am delighted to join my hon . friend in recognising all the fish and chip shops in his constituency , and i would be delighted to accept invitations to a tour of fish and chip shops from any colleague on either side of the house who recognises their vital contribution . what assessment his department has made of the potential impact of us tariffs on scotland ’s exports to that country . we know that this will be a concerning time for businesses in scotland . in 2024 , 12.3 % of goods exported from scotland were exported to the united states . that is why the uk government are focused on negotiating an economic deal with the us . as the business and trade secretary made clear in his statement to the house on may i associate myself with the comments about pope francis and christina mckelvie , and wish you , mr speaker , a happy st george ’s day ? it is very important that we all celebrate our national identities but still come together as one united kingdom . i hope that the secretary of state and i were not too optimistic in our last exchange about trade with the us , in which we hoped that the trump administration would be a boost for scottish business in the united states . what is he doing in the uk ’s discussions with the united states to ensure that specific scottish interests , such as those of the whisky industry , are part of the arrangements ? as i have said at the dispatch box before , it is vital that we do all we can to strengthen our diplomatic , cultural and business ties with the united states . i was in washington and new york for tartan week in the week when tariffs were imposed on the rest of the world , and i made the case for scotch whisky and scottish businesses in particular . we are engaging with scottish exporters and industry representatives to assess the potential impact of us tariffs , and remain in contact with us counterparts . our pragmatic and calm approach has been overwhelmingly welcomed by businesses and industry . we will not address this important issue in a knee - jerk way to get retweets , unlike some others in this house . will the secretary of state join me in welcoming the pragmatic and calm approach of our prime minister to this issue ? he is working in the clear interests of businesses and consumers , in contrast to opposition members , who seem interested only in social media and quick headlines . i could not agree more with my hon . friend . the pragmatic approach of the prime minister and this government to this issue has been welcomed by industry and businesses right across the united kingdom . that is in the national interests of the uk . we work very hard together to make sure that the impacts of us tariffs on the uk are not as bad as we thought they might be . the prime minister was asked — if he will list his official engagements for wednesday 23 april . the entire house will join me in paying tribute to his holiness pope francis , an extraordinary man . his lifelong work on fairness will leave a lasting legacy . people of all backgrounds and beliefs were inspired by his humility and compassion , and the outpouring of grief and love that we have seen in the last two days or so shows the respect and admiration that he was held in around the world . i will attend his funeral on saturday and pay tribute to his courage and leadership . may his holiness rest in peace . i also wish everyone in england a very happy st george ’s day . there is a lot to celebrate : our history , our values and our culture . this morning i had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others . in addition to my duties in this house , i shall have further such meetings later today . may i also wish those in the chamber a happy st george ’s day ? after a cost of living crisis overseen by the chaotic conservative government , many in the tourist industry in torbay believed that they had weathered the storm , as did those in devon and cornwall . however , many in the tourist industry in torbay fear that the government ’s national insurance contribution hikes and effective jobs tax could be the last nail in the coffin for some of those businesses . in the light of that , will the prime minister give me the pleasure of showing him round paignton zoo this summer , so he can see this outstanding , amazing tourist attraction in torbay ? it is one of many across the west of england that , sadly , are massively impacted by the jobs tax . may i start by wishing jennie , the hon . gentleman ’s guide dog , a very happy birthday for yesterday ? she is six years old — although she does not look particularly interested in my answer , i have to say . i recognise the importance of tourism to the hon . gentleman ’s beautiful constituency — i have been there many times , and worked there for a short time — in driving growth and creating jobs . we have announced a new visitor economy advisory council , which will work with business to deliver a new strategy that is focused on supporting growth and the tourism industry . visitbritain has also launched a new international marketing campaign to showcase britain ’s incredible heritage , culture and landscapes , and i know the minister for creative industries , arts and tourism will be happy to keep the hon . gentleman updated . the criminal injuries compensation scheme has not been uprated with inflation since 2012 , which means that in real terms , compensation for victims of violent crime , including rape and child abuse , is worth less than half of what it was then . the consultation response published before easter said that there was not the money to look at changing the scope , tariffs or time limits , despite expert advice and the recommendations of the independent inquiry into child sexual abuse . will the prime minister commit to properly funding the ministry of justice to do this vital reform work , so that victims and their needs can become a priority , instead of an afterthought ? my hon . friend knows my personal commitment to delivering justice for victims of crime , who have been completely failed over the last 14 years . we are improving access to compensation through better online systems , and are equipping staff with the skills that they need to better support victims . we are of course also consulting on a revised victims code , which will increase the powers of the victims ’ commissioner to ensure more accountability . i am happy to ensure that she meets the relevant minister to discuss those issues . we now come to the leader of the opposition . i , too , wish everyone a happy st george ’s day . can i also associate myself with the remarks about the passing of his holiness pope francis on easter monday ? being married to a catholic , i know the profound loss for millions in britain and across the world . does the prime minister now accept that when he said that it was the law that trans women were women , he was wrong ? let me be clear : i welcome the supreme court ruling on this issue . it brings clarity , and it will give confidence to women , and of course to service providers . the equality and human rights commission will now issue updated guidance . it is important that that happens , and that all service providers then act accordingly . this government ’s approach , and my approach , has been as follows : to support and implement the supreme court ruling , and we will ; to continue to protect single - sex spaces based on biological sex , and we will ; to ensure that trans people are treated with respect , and we will ; and to ensure that everybody is given dignity in their everyday lives . i do think this is the time to lower the temperature , move forward and conduct this debate with the care and compassion that it deserves , and i think that should unite the whole house . the prime minister can not bring himself to admit that he was wrong ; that was the question . he spoke about respect and dignity , compassion and lowering the temperature , so will he now apologise to the very brave hon . member for canterbury ( rosie duffield ) for hounding her out of the labour party simply for telling the truth ? i have always approached this on the basis that we should treat everyone with dignity and respect , whatever their different views , and i will continue to do so . i will tell you , mr speaker , why : because when we lose sight of that approach and make this a political football , as happened in the past , we end up with the spectacle of a decent man — and he was a decent man , the previous prime minister — diminishing himself at this dispatch box by making trans jokes while the mother of a murdered trans teenager watched from the public gallery just up there . that will never be my approach . my approach will be to support the ruling , protect single - sex spaces and treat everybody with dignity and respect , and i believe there is a consensus in this house and the country on that approach . there was no apology to the hon . member for canterbury . there is no taking of responsibility . the prime minister talks about political football ; he practically kicked her out of his party — constructive dismissal . he talks about my predecessor . what about the abuse i faced from his mps , who called me a transphobe for supporting what the supreme court has now clarified , to use his words ? and where was he ? he hid for six days without commenting on the supreme court judgment . why did it take him so long to respond ? is it not because he was scared ? the only fiction here is the idea that the right hon . member delivered anything in office . she held the post of minister for women and equalities for two years , and she did precisely nothing . she provided no clarity on the law , and did nothing to improve women ’s lives , which got materially worse under her watch . for example , the opposition talk about hospitals and mixed - sex wards , up hill and down dale . what happened in the last decade ? the use of mixed - sex wards in our nhs rose by 2,000 % . there is a pattern of behaviour here : the women and equalities minister who failed to do anything for women ; the trade minister who failed to get a trade deal with the us ; the business minister who failed to get a deal with british steel . she is a spectator , not a leader . i will tell the prime minister what i did . i stopped the gender—[interruption . ] i will , i will . when his labour leader in scotland was whipping his msps to get male rapists into women ’s prisons , i stopped that gender recognition bill . i helped commission the cass review . i replaced the guidance on single - sex toilets . i made sure that the puberty blockers issue was resolved , while he was sitting there cheering on the ideology that was taking away safe spaces . and when the prime minister stayed silent last week , presumably waiting to hear what morgan mcsweeney thinks , on his whatsapp groups some of his closest ministers were plotting to overturn the supreme court decision . labour mp after labour mp stood up yesterday and challenged the ruling . how can we take his government seriously on this ? i think the whatsapp group the right hon . lady should be worried about is the one with her shadow justice secretary , “ i want the fight to be united . ” he said he is determined “ to bring this coalition ” , as he calls it , “ together … one way or another ” . well , i think we know what that means . every tory voter is appalled at the thought of paying for the nhs ; every reform voter hates what the tories did for the last 14 years . they are not conservatives ; they are a con . who is playing political football now ? the prime minister has no answers . yesterday , labour mp after labour mp challenged the ruling . he should be more worried about his back benchers than my front benchers . his labour ministers called the chair of the equality and human rights commission “ appalling ” . baroness falkner ’s role is critical to enforcing the court ’s judgment . she has had to put up with relentless abuse , not just from his front bench but from activists and ideologues . reappointing her would be a clear sign that he is taking this issue seriously , so will he commit to reappointing baroness falkner when her term expires this year ? i have always said that the debate should be conducted properly , on the principle . i have said it many , many times . i would remind the leader of the opposition that when they were in government , violence against women and girls reached record highs , rape prosecutions fell to record lows , and millions of women were left stuck on nhs waiting lists , unable to get the healthcare they needed . under this labour government , nhs waiting lists are down by more than 200,000 , and there are domestic abuse specialists in 999 control rooms . we strengthened access to maternity pay , something she called excessive . she talks about political footballs , but a coalition of reform and the tories is being formed behind her back . we know what it means when the shadow justice secretary and the prime minister is clearly so uncomfortable talking about this subject . this is a choice between a conservative party that stood up for common sense and a labour party that bends the knee to every passing fad . this is a question about moral courage , and doing the right thing even when it is difficult . the truth is he does n’t have the balls . the prime minister only tells people what they want to hear . he is a weathervane ; he twists in the wind . he cheered an ideology that denied safe spaces to women and girls , because he thought it was cool to do so . he hounded a brave female mp out of his party for telling the truth he accepts now . and now , he is hiding behind the supreme court judgment . is that not because he does not know what he actually believes ? i can only assume that that sounded better when the right hon . lady said it in the mirror earlier . the truth is , it does not really matter what she says , because nobody — none of them behind her — believes that she is going to lead them into the next election anyway . it will be the shadow justice secretary , who is away plotting — that is why he is not here today — and the hon . member for clacton fighting over the bones of the tory party . the conservatives think reform will give them its votes without changing their policy — absolutely no way . the hon . member for clacton will do what he always does : eat the tory party for breakfast . i wish you , mr speaker , and the house a happy st george ’s day . i recently had the pleasure of visiting the national gas operations in peterborough , where the company was announcing a £ 350 million investment in the uk , including at least 100 new jobs in my constituency . the investment will make peterborough the centre of the nation ’s core gas and hydrogen network . one of the big challenges faced by infrastructure projects is the lack of available skills and training for young people . what more can the prime minister do to boost apprenticeships in places such as my constituency to ensure we create the opportunities this country so desperately needs ? the net zero transition is a huge economic opportunity for this country , despite the naysayers on the opposition benches . we have had almost £ 44 billion of investment since july , which will deliver jobs across the country , including in my hon . friend ’s constituency — investment that the opposition presumably do not want . we are ensuring we have the skilled workers that we need , launching skills england and our new growth and skills offer to encourage even more apprenticeships , and supporting the industry - led plan for hydrogen to deliver the workforce needed for the industry of the future . i call the leader of the liberal democrats . i also wish the house and the country a happy st george ’s day , and join the prime minister in paying tribute to the late pope francis . as a christian , i found his compassion absolutely inspiring . my prayers are with catholics in the uk and across the world , who will feel his loss particularly deeply . i have previously raised with the prime minister the issue of north devon district hospital . the previous government promised to rebuild it , as they did hospitals across the south - west , in places such as torbay and musgrove park . unfortunately , they broke that promise , leaving appalling conditions like sewage leaks and patients being treated in corridors . will the prime minister reconsider his decision to delay further the construction of new hospitals , and ask his mps to vote for our motion today for new hospitals ? the previous programme , introduced by the conservative party , was undeliverable and unaffordable , as i think the right hon . gentleman knows and accepts . we have put the new hospital programme on a sustainable footing with a timeline that can be met — we are not prepared to trade on false promises , as the conservatives did — and obviously we have also put record investment into the nhs . i gently urge the right hon . gentleman to one day get a bit more serious about the funding of these measures . every week , he comes to the chamber to push me on two issues : he pushes me to spend a lot more money , but at the same time , in the next breath , he opposes the measures in the budget to raise the necessary money . unlike the prime minister , we had a funded programme at the election . i am disappointed with his reply — i hope he will actually visit some of these hospitals to see the urgent need for rebuilding . at merton mead farm in oxfordshire last week , i saw world - class british beef farmers at work . farmers want the prime minister to be careful in a trade deal with president trump . they were let down by the conservatives ’ appalling trade deals and worry that a bad us deal could allow american agribusiness to undercut them with inferior meat . will the prime minister guarantee a vote in this house on any trade deal that he agrees with the united states ? the right hon . gentleman raises a point that is of real interest and importance to farmers . we will negotiate , as he would expect , in the national interest and uphold the highest animal welfare standards . we are making progress on that , and there will then be a process if a deal is reached . this time last year , train manufacturing at alstom in derby was grinding to a halt . on a single day , workers with a combined welding experience of nearly 1,000 years walked out of its doors , but the whole city came together with crucial backing from this prime minister . what a difference a year makes , with alstom saved and set to host the greatest gathering to celebrate 200 years of rail and our railways coming back into public ownership , with the headquarters of great british railways in derby . does the prime minister agree that , with labour , we are back on track ? my hon . friend is a fantastic champion for derby . she is right : whether it is the workforce i met at alstom or the workers at hitachi in county durham , we will support our rail industry , providing certainty that delivers jobs , investment and security . i met those workforces . i know how worried they were a year ago , as she rightly says , when the previous government were in charge . i am really proud that derby will be the home of great british railways , because we are bringing railways back into public ownership to provide better services for passengers , cutting delays and cancellations and boosting growth across the country . i and my party join the prime minister in his condolences for the passing of his holiness pope francis . the prime minister has often referred to his time working in northern ireland , and i have spoken to one of his bosses , who speaks of his diligence . in that vein , could he speak to his northern ireland team about their understanding of the belfast / good friday agreement ? in an interview , the secretary of state seemed to think that it had been negotiated by ian paisley , rather than david trimble and my party . his northern ireland minister said at the start of this week that the future of northern ireland as part of the union is dependent on opinion polls and she was not sure whether she was a unionist . will the prime minister confirm to me his understanding of the principle of consent and confirm to this house that he is a unionist ? i thank the hon . member for that question . i did work in northern ireland for five years and therefore appreciate at first hand how important these issues are . it was a very formative period for me in terms of my career and my thinking . the good friday agreement is one of the proudest achievements of the last labour government . i pay tribute to everybody who helped to bring that about , because , as the hon . member and other members will know , it was such an important moment in the history of the conflict . i absolutely stand four - square behind its principles , some of which i was doing my part to help implement when i was working in northern ireland , and they will always drive me on the issues that he raises with me . happy st george ’s day , mr speaker . may i associate myself with the prime minister ’s remarks about pope francis ? after 14 years of a conservative government , too many of my constituents live on low incomes or in real poverty . i very much welcome the employment support proposals in the welfare green paper , but the government have to be clear about the real opportunities they are offering to the more than 3 million families who they say will lose out financially as a result of this package . before asking mps to vote , can the prime minister confirm that we will see fresh analysis from the office for budget responsibility , evidence on who will be affected by the personal independence payments changes , and the government ’s own assessment of the employment impact of their measures ? will he confirm that this policy will not result in increased experience of poverty ? we are reforming a broken system — the system that we inherited . i think most people accept that it needs reform , because it traps people in unemployment and inactivity , and we need to reform it for that reason . the principles will be that we will provide support where support is needed . where people want to get into work , we will help them into work . the current system operates against people who want to get into work and make that transition ; if they can work , they should work . moving into work is what halves the risk of being in poverty , and that is why we have invested £ 1 billion in tailored employment support . of course , we are also introducing a new premium for those with the most severe lifelong disabilities who will never be able to work . last week , former steelworkers in port talbot watched in dismay as this government deemed their livelihoods worth less than those in scunthorpe . freedom of information requests reveal that the uk government do not know how their funding for reskilling workers in wales is being used or even how many people are being retrained , and we know that concerns have been raised by the transition board . if the government can not explain how they are helping port talbot ’s laid - off workers to build a future through reskilling , why should those workers not come to the logical conclusion that labour has abandoned them ? the right hon . member raises an important issue . i visited port talbot a number of times and heard at first hand from the workforce . she may or may not know that even in opposition , before the election , i was talking to the owners to try to persuade them to delay their decisions , because i knew an election was coming . that is how important i thought it was . i remind her that at the same time , the then prime minister refused to pick up a call to the first minister even to discuss the issue . i took a different approach , because i realised just how important it was . the right hon . lady compares the situation with the decision we took last week , but i remind her that the blast furnaces were turned off in january last year and the coke ovens in march 2024 , which was before the election . that was the very thing i was trying to ensure did not happen , for reasons that she and the workforce will understand , and i was talking to the workforce throughout . since then we have been able to negotiate an improved deal with tata that means better terms for the workers , and we did that within 10 weeks . we are working hard to maximise opportunities from the £ 1.25 billion investment in an electric arc furnace , we are supporting those facing job losses with £ 80 million of funding to learn new skills , and we are supporting the supply chains and protecting communities . the right hon . lady talks about protecting working people , but she voted against the biggest devolution settlement since devolution . that includes more money for public services , including the nhs , and her party voted against it . i commend the prime minister and his government for the action taken to reform the nhs in england and make it fit for the modern day , with improved technology , more gps and appointments , and waiting lists cut for consecutive months . however , it is deeply unfortunate that in scotland the snp government have made the political choice to waste taxpayer money on vanity projects , flawed legislation and failed court cases rather than focus on improving our health service . does the prime minister agree that the people of airdrie and shotts , who have been promised a new hospital for almost a decade , deserve far better than to suffer in pain while on waiting lists or to receive treatment in crumbling buildings as a direct consequence of snp incompetence ? my hon . friend is a real champion for airdrie and shotts . over 60,000 scots have been stuck , waiting for tests or treatment for over a year , which is a 46 % rise in one year . almost 50,000 fewer operations have been carried out compared with before the pandemic . to compare what the snp is doing with what we are doing here in england , we have driven down waiting lists within six months , with six months in a row of reductions , and we have over 3 million extra appointments . scotland ’s nhs urgently needs change , but the snp has no strategy or plan — it has absolutely no ideas . the danger posed by china to our national security is self - evident . can the prime minister explain why he and his government have chosen to treat beijing as a business partner and not as the hostile state that it truly is ? i have set out our approach to china a number of times . it is not materially different from the approach in the last years of the previous government , i might add . in relation to scunthorpe , the deal that we had to deal with during recess was the deal negotiated by the last government . we have taken sensible decisions in the national interest and will continue to do so . i am sure the prime minister will join me in celebrating the opening of the new brixton blood donation centre in my constituency , which in three months has seen over 3,700 people donate , more than 1,000 of them first - timers and 10 % of them black . however , given that sickle cell anaemia is the fastest growing genetic condition in the uk , that is not enough . demand for the ro blood subtype — more common in people of african descent — is rising by 10 % to 15 % annually , and it is crucial for treating sickle cell . rules around travellers as well as inaccurate iron tests mean that we are seeing willing black donors turned away for four to 12 months . of course blood donation must be safe , but failure to review the guidelines is costing lives . will the prime minister commit to reviewing the rules and join me in calling on you , mr speaker , to help us all play our part by facilitating a biannual blood drive in parliament ? i am trying to arrange that . i will leave that to you , mr speaker . i do not think it is for me to suggest that you donate your blood , although i am sure that you do and that we can support this jointly . we should take that up across the house under your leadership , mr speaker . let me join my hon . friend in welcoming the new brixton blood donor centre and the lifesaving support that it provides . increasing donor diversity is a priority for the nhs , and we are working to increase ro blood donations by engaging with communities who are more likely to have that blood type . i will ensure that she meets the relevant health minister to discuss what more we can do in this area . british governments of all political persuasions have long taken pride in reducing the carbon footprint of the british manufacturing industry . unfortunately , in too many cases , too much of that so - called reduction has been achieved by driving british industry abroad to countries such as china and india that actually use more carbon to produce the same product — british steel is just the latest example of that — which is bad for the global environment and disastrous for the british economy . that is against a background of european carbon policies that have failed over 20 years . does the prime minister have a new domestic british policy that will protect british industry from this disastrous long - term trend ? we are doing everything available to us to protect car building in this country . the right hon . gentleman will have noticed that two weeks ago , i made announcements about the zero emission vehicle mandate and what more we could do to support the industry . that was an immediate response to circumstances as they were , but i indicated at the time — and i do so again — that we will do whatever it takes to support our car industry . my constituent billy spent months trying to see a gp to investigate his symptoms . it took four months of telephone appointments before he was finally seen in person and got the test that diagnosed stage 4 cancer . that delay in diagnosis has dramatically changed the prognosis , and as someone who has become a friend , it hurts me to see the pain that he is now living in . does the prime minister agree that primary care is a vital part of the healthcare system and that we need wider access to both in - person and telephone appointments ? i am deeply sorry to hear about billy ’s case ; i am sure the whole house is . our focus has to be on making sure that gps spend more time caring for patients . that includes the investment of an additional £ 889 million in general practice in england , which has put over 1,500 gps into surgeries since october . we did deliver a record settlement for scotland ’s public services to help fix our nhs and ensure that people like billy get the care that they deserve . through the ages , an innovative and vibrant city of london has underpinned investment and growth in the wider economy , but the main challenge the city currently faces is how to get more capital into capital markets . like many , i believe that london could gain new momentum if the government took bold action to challenge and empower those who steward our pension assets to do things in new ways . following the chancellor ’s decision to offer continuity of leadership at the financial conduct authority , will the prime minister convene an urgent no . 10 summit with city leaders and the regulators to provide a reset and to maximise the chances that the city can lead economic growth and recovery in these times of grave uncertainty and turmoil ? the right hon . gentleman is right that we need to go further and faster in kick - starting growth and attracting the investment we need to create jobs , and that our regulators must regulate for growth and not just for risk . we do want that continuity of leadership that he mentioned , and we are convening and getting people together to drive growth . we will take away the ideas that he put on the table . proposed changes to personal independence payments mean that people who require various levels of support due to lifelong conditions such as learning disabilities will not meet the new eligibility criteria . however , the green paper introduces a group of people with lifelong conditions who will not be subject to reassessment . can the prime minister confirm that people with a learning disability — a lifelong condition that will not change — will be included in the group of claimants who will not be subjected to repeated reassessments ? i thank my hon . friend for her question ; i know this issue means a lot to her . we are clear on the principles for reform : protecting those with the most severe disabilities , who will never be able to work , as she refers to , and making sure that people with the most severe disabilities and health conditions will never again face the prospect of being constantly reassessed . we are making sure that extra financial support is based on the impact of a health condition or disability , not the capacity to work , and i can reassure her that we are carefully considering options for transitional protection . his chancellor ’s economic policies started off badly and have headed rapidly downhill from there , his energy secretary ’s policies ensure that energy - rich scotland lives under the highest domestic and commercial energy prices in the world , and his foreign secretary provides diplomatic cover for the atrocities committed in gaza by the israel defence forces , to the horror of the people of scotland , but the prime minister is the incompetent - in - chief who refuses to bring his ministers into line . that is just one of the reasons why independence enjoys an 11 - point lead over remaining in this dysfunctional , broken , brexit britain . does he understand why the people of scotland are so dissatisfied with his latest iteration of dysfunctional british rule in scotland ? does the hon . gentleman understand that the electorate in scotland answered that question in july of last year ? i remember that there used to be quite a few snp members sitting on the opposition benches ; now it is a distant cry from up on the back benches . last week , humanitarian law organisations applied for an arrest warrant for israeli foreign minister gideon sa’ar over alleged war crimes in gaza , including the siege of kamal adwan hospital and the torture of its director , dr hussam abu safiya , yet the red carpet was rolled out . sa’ar has justified blocking vital humanitarian aid into gaza , backed the illegal annexation of palestinian land and rejected a palestinian state . the prime minister is a human rights lawyer , so surely he knows that the uk has a legal duty to uphold international law . why , then , did he block the arrest of an unindicted war criminal ? i did n’t . on a point of order , mr speaker . you , like me , have long been a supporter of britain ’s nuclear test veterans , so i wonder whether you could advise me . given that government lawyers have finally admitted , after 73 years of denial , that tests may have taken place at the time that those veterans were in the south atlantic — they say that “ information may have been recorded by scientists carrying out radiation monitoring ” — surely a statement in the house by a government minister is required . how can i facilitate that?[official report , i do not think i even need to answer that ; the right hon . gentleman is a man who knows how to facilitate that , and i know the matter will not end here . that is not a point of order for the chair , and i am not carrying on questions , but he has certainly got the matter on the record and i know he will now pursue it in the many ways available to him . presentation and first reading ( daisy cooper presented a bill to require water companies to prioritise areas with chalk streams and related habitats when investing in new and upgraded sewerage systems , including foul water leak prevention and the replacement or upgrading of porous sewage pipelines ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on motion for leave to bring in a bill ( 12.39 pm i beg to move , that leave be given to bring in a bill to require the secretary of state to prepare and publish a strategy for tackling interpersonal abuse and violence against men and boys ; and for connected purposes . this labour government have pledged to halve instances of violence against women and girls , an intent that i have no doubt those on both sides of this house are fully able to support . the aim of this bill is to tackle an aspect of the current violence against women and girls strategy — an aspect that makes no sense and that it is essential for the government to address . the violence against women and girls strategy currently includes male victims of violence against women and girls . the government still define violence against women and girls , or vawg , as a category of crimes which disproportionately affect women . therefore , all victims of crimes such as domestic abuse , rape , sexual assault , digital image abuse , forced marriage and honour - based violence , including men and boys , are considered victims of vawg . i want to make it clear that this bill in no way detracts from the work already done and still to be done in tackling violence against women and girls ; the bill simply aims to ensure that male victims of those crimes have a dedicated strategy that reflects the differing nature of their circumstances and ensures that male survivors are recognised and receive appropriate support . the current mis - categorisation forces male victims into spaces and discussions that may more appropriately be reserved for women . at present the government have no dedicated strategy for tackling interpersonal abuse and violence against men and boys . in 2019 , the previous government published their first ever position statement on male victims , and they followed this in 2022 with an addendum on supporting male victims . the change in government and a revised strategy on violence against women and girls present a new opportunity to devise a parallel strategy for violence against men and boys in lieu of any direction from the government regarding the publication of a new , updated position statement . the minister for safeguarding , it should be noted that when the government state their hope to halve violence against women and girls , the start - state of that data currently includes victims who are men and boys . victims of gender - based violence face many barriers that prevent them from reporting instances of abuse : the fear of not being believed ; the threat that the perpetrator may still pose ; or the simple fact of not being aware of the services available to help or being aware and not being able to access them . there are also the complexities around the consequences of disclosure , such as the impact on living arrangements or financial security and how this can , in turn , lead to instances of coercive control . for men and boys , however , there are additional factors : the shame and stigma of not appearing to be masculine , of being vulnerable , of potentially having their sexuality outed , and of being the victim of a crime considered , and officially referred to , as applying to female victims . the majority of men seeking help have coped alone , often for long periods , and are still living with their abusive partners . men in such circumstances might need help with housing and finances , and , in circumstances involving dependent children , with how they can maintain their role as a father . safety planning for this group of men must be initiated at the point of disclosure , as the majority of those seeking help do not return to those providing it following first contact . the crime survey for england and wales for the year ending september 2024 showed that 3 % of men aged 16 and over were victims of domestic abuse between september 2023 and september 2024 , compared with 6.6 % of women . according to women ’s aid ’s 2025 annual audit report , as of may 2024 there were just 50 refuges in england with bed spaces for men . as such , of a total of 63,950 people supported in safe accommodation in that period , only 1,830 were men . there is also a difference in the needs of men who are gay , bisexual or trans . owing to the complexities of the nature of these relationships and the risk of being outed , of being the victim of prejudice or of being disowned by family members , male victims are less likely to report domestic abuse to statutory services . carlisle and withers green ’s 2023 survey highlighted that over 70 % of gay , bisexual and trans male victims of domestic abuse had never sought support from a statutory service provider . their statistics are therefore not recorded in any official figures and as a result these victims find themselves further isolated , increasing their vulnerability to abuse . sexual abuse against men is a vastly under - reported crime : one in four adults sexually assaulted in the uk each year is a man ; one in 10 rapes and one in seven sexual assaults have male victims according to the office for national statistics ; 3.5 % of boys become victims of child sexual abuse before they turn 16 ; one in four victims of child sexual abuse are men ; and over 70 % of child sex abusers are people known to their victims . shame , stigma , homophobia and emasculation are all factors in preventing sexual abuse from being reported . it often takes years for a male victim to report a sexual assault to the police . male sexual assault survivors are three times more likely to tell a family member , friend or colleague than they are to report an incident to the police . data from the office for national statistics suggests that fewer than a third of male victims of sexual assault have ever disclosed what they have experienced . for straight men , there can also be a hesitancy to disclose abuse owing to the misconception that men should be physically strong enough to prevent an assault . male victims of abuse who have been forced to penetrate by a partner can struggle to identify their experiences as abuse because it caused them to be aroused . rape and sexual abuse should never be minimised because a perpetrator is female . the law currently states that while males and females can be the victim of rape , only males can realistically commit the act of rape . the introduction of a “ forced to penetrate ” sexual offence could therefore address that . honour - based violence is another factor that is poorly understood and catered for . victims of honour - based violence are at greater risk of repeat victimisation and are often at risk from multiple perpetrators . however , no discrete crime of so - called honour - based violence or abuse is defined in our legislation , so in most instances male victims would be classified by police as victims of violence without injury or stalking and harassment . data from the crown prosecution service suggests that around 30 % of prosecutions for honour - based violence involve male victims . additionally , the forced marriage unit has consistently seen that 20 % of forced marriage victims are male . that often includes men from overseas who are forced to marry uk citizens and can find themselves forced into domestic servitude , thus also becoming victims of modern slavery . this time last year , professor nicola graham - kevan of the university of lancashire undertook research and published data on how male survivors feel about being categorised as victims of violence against women and girls : 89 % stated that it made it harder to seek help ; 89 % stated that they experienced distress ; 88 % stated that the government do not care ; 80 % stated that it was minimising their experiences ; 75 % stated that it was not taken seriously ; and 73 % stated that it was not recognised by society . it is clear that the damaging impact of including male victims within a strategy that caters for violence against women and girls means that male survivors can not identify with that labelling . organisations such as we are survivors , the men & boys coalition and the mankind initiative have been instrumental in providing support to male victims and advocating for a solution , and i thank them for their work to highlight this inequality . last november , the victims ’ commissioner baroness helen newlove wrote to the safeguarding minister outlining many of the same concerns that i have highlighted . the concerns are not unique ; they are shared by the male survivor community . the view of the victims ’ commissioner should not go unheeded , nor that of her predecessor dame vera baird kc , who expressed similar views . the purpose of the bill is echoed in baroness newlove ’s words : “ i believe it is beyond time for a dedicated men and boys ’ strategy , with specific policies , strategic milestones , and accompanying funding . a tailored approach for male victims of interpersonal violence is essential to developing their rights and ensuring the availability of appropriate support services . i urge you to seize this opportunity to create both a robust , cross - governmental vawg strategy and a separate , comprehensive strategy for men and boys , with clear policies , strategic targets , milestones , and sustainable funding arrangements . ” six months later , and with nothing further heard on implementing such a strategy , this bill is required to push the safeguarding minister to act . my hope is that male survivors of such traumatic violence and abuse can finally be given the focus their plight deserves . i also hope that members on both sides of the house feel they can support what the bill sets out to achieve , and i thank them all for listening . question put and agreed to . ordered , that sir iain duncan smith , sir roger gale , sir ashley fox , charlie dewhirst , wendy morton , david simmonds , paul holmes , rebecca smith , bob blackman , alison griffiths , mr richard holden and ben obese - jecty present the bill . ben obese - jecty accordingly presented the bill . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on i inform the house that i have selected the amendment in the name of the prime minister . i beg to move , that this house regrets the appalling state of repair of nhs hospitals across the country ; notes that the nhs maintenance backlog rose to £ 13.8 billion in 2023 - 24 ; further notes the sustained pattern of cannibalising nhs capital budgets to keep day - to - day services running ; condemns the previous government ’s record of starved repair budgets and exploding maintenance backlogs , which made sewage leaks , cracked walls , crumbling ceilings and sinking floors commonplace ; further condemns the previous government for launching the new hospital programme with no realistic plan to fund or deliver it ; further regrets that almost half of the selected hospitals are now not set to begin construction until after 2030 ; calls on the government to reverse the delay to the new hospital programme and create a crumbling hospitals taskforce to bring construction dates forward ; and further calls on the government to end the vicious cycle of false economies and rising repair backlogs by putting hospitals across the country on a path towards sustainable funding . the appalling state of our hospital buildings is a national scandal . everybody in this country should be in control of their own lives and health , which means everybody getting the care they need when and where they need it , but that can never be realised while so many patients are treating in grossly inadequate settings . from shropshire to cornwall , cambridgeshire , watford and devon , patients are losing their dignity because of decisions taken by the conservatives , and the labour government ’s failure to rectify them . the conservatives ’ record is one of starved repair budgets , serious leaks , crumbling ceilings and bucket - strewn wards . it is an outrage that millions of people are waiting for treatment , yet overcrowded hospitals have had to close operating theatres because they are no longer fit for use . patients and hospital staff deserve the dignity of safe , modern and clean environments , but instead the previous government shamefully chose to raid the repair budget to plug the gap in day - to - day costs , as our hospitals fell apart , and the new government , who were elected on what increasingly looks like false hope , are pursuing a false economy in delaying the desperately needed new hospital programme . as with so much of their agenda , the government promised so much but are delivering so little and betraying those who put their faith in the labour party . farmers who were fed up with the tories taking them for granted have been hit with a tax grab on their families ’ futures . employers , who were promised growth and no new taxes , have been whacked with a national insurance increase . patients , who were promised new hospitals , have had them taken away . i was with the hon . lady almost up until that point . i congratulate her on opening the debate . it is absolutely true that the new hospital programme did not deliver new hospitals and was unfunded under the tories . however , it is being funded now under labour . money is being invested in my local hospitals , in the imperial college healthcare nhs trust , and it is preparing for major rebuilds . will she perhaps give the new government a little credit for what they have done , and correctly identify the shambles that we were left with ? the hon . member will be aware that there were not 40 new hospitals — they were not all hospitals and there were not 40 of them . the issue here is that the start dates for work on many hospitals that need urgent rebuilding have been pushed back into the 2030s , long beyond the life of this parliament . the people who are served by those hospitals were promised new facilities and have not had them . that is devastating for those communities . if the conservative approach was contemptible , labour ’s approach has been to procrastinate . the cost to the nhs of papering over the cracks and keeping hospitals running past their natural lifespan is enormous . that is why the government must reverse the delay to the new hospital programme at once and urgently deliver the new hospitals that patients have long been promised . i wonder if the hon . member can explain to me how spending £ 22 billion extra on the national health service this year can in any way be described as procrastination . it is important to recognise that the additional investment in the nhs amounts to about £ 10 billion a year — according to office for budget responsibility numbers , which i am sure the hon . gentleman has looked at — because of the cost of national insurance hikes and of compensating other public sector employers for those hikes . the £ 22 billion figure is somewhat misleading . the point that we are making is that it is a false economy to keep those buildings going , to keep repairing a crumbling estate , to keep patching up and putting a sticking plaster on those problems . those buildings need to be demolished and rebuilt , so that approach is a false economy . it would be much better to build new buildings up front and save on future repair costs . we need to ensure that no one is treated in broken , uncomfortable and unsafe facilities . repairing and replacing crumbling , substandard hospitals is not only vital for delivering better care and treating - more patients , but crucial for rebuilding the economy after years of conservative economic vandalism . how much would all this cost ? in my county of shropshire , the cost of the maintenance backlog across all sites has reached about £ 75 million . i am sure that everyone here would agree that £ 75 million is a lot of money — indeed , it is so much that it is the total amount of government capital investment for hospices this year — but in terms of hospital maintenance it is a drop in the ocean . torbay hospital needs more than £ 50 million to clear the backlog , watford hospital has a backlog of £ 63 million , and hull royal infirmary requires an eye - watering £ 70 million . across england , the figure is a colossal £ 13.8 billion — and that is just to bring our existing hospital estate to the minimum standard . the hon . member is right that a huge amount of money needs to be spent . a lot of that goes back to the fact that , as lord darzi tells us , £ 37 billion less was spent on hospital buildings in the 2010s than was necessary . will she remind me who was in government for the for half of the 2010s ? the hon . gentleman will be aware that , when one comes into government and has to clean up the mess left behind by the previous government , one has to make difficult choices . it is the job of the opposition to point out where they would make those choices or take different options . we would invest to save money in the long run , rather than fritter money away on a repair bill for buildings that need to be demolished . it is not sensible to pour good money after bad when the right thing to do is invest in a new fit - for - purpose and modern estate that does not have endless and extortionate maintenance requirements . rose — i will make some progress . at north devon district hospital , the ducting of the ventilation system that serves the operating theatres has not been changed since it was installed in 1979 , and can not be replaced because of ceiling height and asbestos . as a result , all operating theatres have been non - compliant with nhs england buildings guidance since 2007 . the good people of devon clearly need a new hospital , and they were promised that they would have one by 2030 , only for the labour government to take it away and decide that the change those people need will not be delivered for another decade . even hospitals with comparatively few maintenance problems , such as the royal shrewsbury hospital , which serves my constituents and has a £ 35 million backlog , are clearly a long way short of being up to standard . i will not go into detail again about the catalogue of issues in shropshire — the ambulance delays and station closures , the waiting times for check - ups , scans and surgeries , or the substandard state of cancer care — but they all combine to put huge pressure on hospitals , where staff and buildings are straining under the load . i commend the hon . lady and the liberal democrats for securing this debate . one issue that they have not mentioned in their motion is car parking at hospitals , which is an ongoing problem for disabled people and patients who miss or delay their appointments as a result of a lack of spaces . does she agree that car parking is central to addressing the issues that she is setting out ? car parking is a real problem , particularly where public transport is poor — it plagues my constituents — and when it is unrealistically expensive for people who need to use hospital facilities . i thank the hon . member for that point . the nhs crisis impacts on patient outcomes . my constituent emma was left in the “ fit to sit ” area for 48 hours despite having been diagnosed with suspected sepsis , 96 - year - old mary waited outside in an ambulance for 11 hours , and 82 - year - old paula spent 24 hours on a trolley in a corridor . that is the reality in hospitals up and down the country . i think we all agree that that is a disgrace and it must be rectified . will the hon . lady give way ? i will make some progress . one of the main reasons those problems have not been rectified is successive delays from successive governments . shropshire is , again , a prime example . this is not related to the new hospital programme , but none the less , £ 312 million was granted for the hospital transformation programme in shropshire back in 2018 . seven years later , while the country has been through five prime ministers and eight different health secretaries , shropshire is still waiting for that transformation to take place . opposition from both the labour and conservative councils that serve the area , along with the ridiculously lengthy process that capital expenditure has to go through to be signed off , means that desperately needed improvements have been horribly delayed as construction costs rise . as a result , the original plans have been scaled back and their value diminished . my hon . friend mentions the inordinate delays that occur with regard to applications for capital funds . i have watched with horror as my local hospital trust in west hertfordshire has had to submit business case after business case while watching the costs rack up . does she agree that one way to spend the allocated money more efficiently would be by devolving those budgets to local hospital trusts , rather than having a centralised programme that drives up the costs ? i could not agree more . that is exactly the situation we saw in shropshire . once again , the people who will suffer are the patients . last year , less than £ 900 million of the £ 13.8 billion required to eradicate the repair backlog for hospitals was invested — just 6.5 % . it does not take an accountant to work out that at that rate , it will take 15 years to clear the current backlog , let alone the further deterioration of the crumbling buildings . investment in eradicating the repair backlog fell sharply from £ 1.4 billion in 2021 to £ 895 million in 2023 - 24 — a fall of 37 % . i am afraid that , just like their approach to fixing social care , the government ’s continued lack of imagination and ambition is leaving our nhs less productive and less stable , which risks leaving millions languishing on nhs waiting lists . rose — i will give way to i am most grateful to the hon . lady for her delayed response . i am struck by her lack of response to two of my colleagues . she did not acknowledge to my hon . friend i am pleased that the hon . gentleman ’s hospital is being dealt with , but i am sure that the residents of torbay will not feel the benefit of that . i am slightly surprised that he thinks that the decade since the liberal democrats were in power has had no impact whatsoever . i did address the point that when a party comes into government and has to clear up the appalling mess left by the previous government , there are difficult choices to be made . his party knows that . labour members , for example , have voted to retain the two - child benefit cap and keep a quarter of a million children in poverty — something that no one in my party has ever voted for . the last time i opened a liberal democrat opposition day debate was in october , and the topic was primary care . i explained how the government ’s failure to invest in primary care was a false economy that increased pressures and costs in the critical parts of the system . the management of our hospital buildings displays that same false economy . just as spending money on critical care instead of prevention and public health is a poor approach to managing a health service , waiting for the roof to collapse is an irresponsible way to manage nhs buildings . as problems are ignored and investment is poorly targeted , it is the patients and the hard - working staff striving to help them who are forced to suffer . this is not just about the new hospital programme . across the country , there are thousands of gp surgeries that need urgent improvement if they are to provide the care that patients deserve . more than 2,000 hospital buildings across england were built before the foundation of the nhs in 1948 , while the state of gp surgeries varies wildly . many surgeries are simply no longer fit for purpose , having been built in the 1950s . prescott surgery in my constituency , for example , has long been recognised as somewhere that needs to drastically increase in size because the population of the village has increased drastically itself . despite the land and the community infrastructure levy funding being available , there is no sign of a new surgery being built . as the delay continues , the costs are rising and the challenge grows for both the council and the integrated care board , which are already under immense pressure to cut their costs . instead of pursuing fantasies like the conservatives or false economies like the labour party , the liberal democrats would invest to save by starting construction now , and ending the epidemic of cancelled operations , closed - off wards and huge sums wasted on emergency repairs . that would save the taxpayer money in the long run and benefit patients much sooner . the hon . lady is being a little bit unrealistic . i have three world - class hospitals in my constituency : charing cross , hammersmith and st mary ’s paddington . the repair bill is £ 874 million , but the rebuild or new build cost would be £ 4 billion . yes , we are refurbishing parts of charing cross and putting a lot of investment into preparing for that work , but the idea that suddenly the hon . lady is going to come up with tens , if not hundreds , of billions of pounds is unrealistic , is it not ? the plan that we have put forward involves £ 10 billion over 10 years , and i will come to that in a moment . the real issue is that we can not pick one hospital and say that it is indicative of an nhs that is being dealt with appropriately . hospitals across the country are falling apart . for example , stepping hill , in the constituency of my hon . friend our 10 - year guaranteed capital investment programme would provide long - term security and fix our crumbling hospitals and creaking gp surgeries . it would provide an extra £ 10 billion for our crumbling buildings over the next decade , improving outcomes for patients , boosting productivity and cutting day - to - day costs for the nhs . providing certainty is crucial . as it stands , managers have to raid precious budgets not just to plug leaking pipes , but to plug staffing gaps when winter pressure arrives . that is why we would also end the reactive approach to the annual winter crisis through our winter taskforce . instead of the average £ 376 million of emergency funding announced late into the winter each year for the last seven years , our winter taskforce would manage a ringfenced fund of £ 1.5 billion over the next four years . that would help hospitals to plan their budgets and build resilience in wards , a&e departments , ambulance services and patient discharging . the hon . lady is talking about the day - to - day budgets of the nhs , in particular the costs of paying off previous debts . she talked about the work that needed to be done during the coalition years and in the decade and a half since then , in response to interventions from labour members . does she agree that one of the biggest messes that needed to be cleared up then , which is still being felt in nhs budgets , is the disastrous private finance initiatives of the blair and brown years ? there have been successive failures in nhs management that all parties need to hold their hands up for — that is a fair point . we should , though , focus on the task in hand rather than continually going back decades , either to the coalition government or to the blair government before that . that is not helpful to our constituents , who want a solution now . on that point , will the hon . lady give way ? no . i have been very generous with my time and i am going to make some progress . we are also campaigning for a review of outdated government finance rules that prevent nhs trusts from investing the funds that they have raised into their own buildings . even nhs managers struggle to access common - sense investment in their facilities due to overly complex rules and glacial processes . trusts are prevented from using unspent funds on improving their buildings . we need root - and - branch reform , combined with our 10 - year programme of investment , to bring our local health facilities up to scratch . in conclusion , the recent history of the nhs is one of short - term decision making and of the failure of successive governments to grasp the nettle of long - term sustained investment in the things that matter : hospital buildings , gp services , dentistry , pharmacy and , crucially , the unspoken crisis of social care . the outcome is an organisation that is spending millions of pounds to go backwards . it truly is a false economy . this government have spoken warmly of the need to reform the nhs and improve productivity , and we support them in that , but we can not expect to retain staff and provide high - quality care when so many doctors and nurses are negotiating leaking roofs and sewage backing up on the wards . dealing with the new hospital programme is a matter of urgency , and i urge the secretary of state to , at long last , grasp the nettle . i call stephen kinnock — is it?—to move the amendment ; i have a different name in front of me . i am glad you recognised me from the chair , mr speaker . i have lost some hair since we last spoke . i beg to move an amendment , to leave out from “ it ” to end and insert : “ also notes that the chancellor has announced new fiscal rules to ensure capital budgets can no longer be cannibalised , with transfers from capital to resource budgets not permitted ; recognises that the previous government left a new hospital programme which was unfunded , unrealistic and undeliverable ; welcomes that the government has taken action to review that programme and has published the new hospital programme plan for implementation , to put the programme on a sustainable footing ; supports the government ’s investment in the plan , which will increase to up to £ 15 billion over each consecutive five - year wave , averaging around £ 3 billion a year from 2030 ; and further supports the work being done to bring forward construction of the reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete replacement schemes wherever possible , to ensure that patient and staff safety is prioritised . ” the amendment on the order paper is in the name of my right hon . and learned friend the prime minister . i thank the liberal democrats for using their opposition day to address a matter of vital importance for so many members , including many colleagues right across the chamber and their constituents . i sincerely hope that the liberal democrats will work with us on solutions , not on soundbites , because we need to be realistic about the problems we face and serious about how we tackle them . the new hospital programme was announced by the last government to much fanfare in october 2020 , with a promise to deliver 40 new hospitals by 2030 . we were told that there was a plan and a timetable , and we were glibly assured that it was fully funded , but from the outset it was clear that there were not 40 new schemes — some were just refurbishments or extensions . to put it simply , there were not 40 projects , they were not all new and many of them were not even hospitals . the spin around the programme was widely questioned and challenged before the general election , but nevertheless we were truly shocked by what we found on entering the department of health and social care . the programme was hugely delayed , by several years more than had already been revealed by the national audit office . there was no credible plan to deliver the building projects , let alone to deliver them all in the next five years , and there was not even enough construction capacity in the uk to build all the hospitals in the new hospital programme by 2030 . that is why when the hospitals with reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete were brought into the nhp in 2023 , even the last government had the sense to admit that nine schemes would have to be delivered past 2030 in order to prioritise the raac hospitals . perhaps most shocking of all , the funding for the programme was due to run out a month ago , with no provision whatsoever for future years : the money simply was not there . the programme was built on nothing more than false hope , dodgy claims and disingenuous press releases . does the minister share my constituents ’ anger at the failure of the tories to back up any of their promises about new hospitals ? will he reassure me that my constituents who are served by airedale general hospital will finally get a new hospital to deal with the raac in an affordable , deliverable timetable , unlike the false promises of the conservatives ? my hon . friend is a doughty champion for her constituents , and she is absolutely right . the point she makes raises the even bigger issue of trust in politics and the trust that her constituents have in this place . that trust was fundamentally undermined by the disingenuous nature of what went on with the previous hospital programme . the british people are grown up enough for us to be able to level with them , be straight with them and say , “ this plan is credible and affordable . it ’s based on facts , not fantasy . ” on the point of trust , the conservatives completely blew trust with the constituents of west hertfordshire . they promised a new hospital — they even said in 2023 that it would be fully funded , and it clearly was not . at the most recent general election , the labour party promised that watford general hospital would be a priority . will the minister make a new promise to keep that trust by coming to visit that hospital this year ? i am sure the hon . lady will appreciate the fact that we have now come forward with a programme built not on sand or smoke and mirrors , but on reality , and the hospital she mentioned will be a part of that . she is very welcome to write to me with any further representations . the situation i have described is the dog ’s breakfast that we inherited from the conservatives . this is genuinely not a partisan point , because when the previous government did the right thing — for example , on the tobacco and vapes bill — we were more than happy to support them , but where they failed , fibbed , and fobbed off members of this house , we will not pretend that they were acting in good faith . it now falls to us to level with the british people about why their hospitals will not be fixed on time . our constituents are understandably furious , because our national health service is quite literally crumbling . as lord darzi found in his investigation , over the past 14 years our nhs has been starved of capital , with a staggering £ 37 billion under - investment over the course of the 2010s . i know that we will hear today from hon . members about many examples of hospital roofs failing or falling , leaky pipes that freeze over in the winter and buckets for catching rainwater in corridors , and i know that capital spending is needed now more than ever . although we are deeply shocked by the neglect and incompetence of the conservatives , it has not prevented us from rolling up our sleeves and clearing up the mess that they left behind . that is why we immediately commissioned a review , which had two core objectives . the first was to put the programme on a firm footing with sustainable funding , so that all the projects can be delivered to a realistic and affordable timetable . the second was to give patients a realistic , deliverable timetable based on facts rather than fantasy . my hon . friend talks about realistic timelines , which are really important . my constituents in harlow were promised a new hospital when there was clearly no money , no business plan and not even a site made available for it . does he agree that this work is so important for the trust that we want to have from our constituents ? certainly in harlow , we have a realistic timeframe and plan that we can actually meet . my hon . friend is also a doughty champion for his constituents . with each brick we build in the new hospital programme , i hope that we will start to rebuild some trust between his constituents and this place . he is absolutely right to point out that it is much better to have a realistic programme , rather than one built on smoke and mirrors . officials reported on the review in the autumn and set out a range of options for a more realistic timetable for delivery . in january , my right hon . friend the secretary of state for health and social care announced five - year waves of investment , backed by up to £ 15 billion of investment over consecutive five - year waves , averaging £ 3 billion a year from 2030 . our programme is a balanced portfolio of hospital schemes at different development stages , being delivered now and into the future . it is the most efficient and cost - effective way of giving our nhs the buildings it needs , while also giving the construction sector the certainty that it needs to deliver . the minister referred to the capital needs of the nhs as a whole . as my hon . friend i was very pleased to see the £ 102 million capital investment in gp primary care . i encourage the hon . gentleman ’s icb to look very carefully at that fund and to explore the potential that it offers . we are in conversation with colleagues in the ministry of housing , communities and local government about ensuring that section 106 processes are working properly , so that when there are new developments , there is proper wraparound in the social infrastructure required to make them sustainable . in the space of just nine short months , we have gone from a charade based on smoke and mirrors to a programme based on serious , systematic delivery . the minister is setting out very articulately what this government are doing to clear up the mess around the hospital provision that this country needs . does he agree that the announcement by dartford and gravesham nhs trust last week that it will build a new and expanded intensive care unit at dare nt valley hospital is a big step forward for dartford residents ? it badly needs new facilities to cope with waiting lists and get them down and to cope with the rising population of the area . my hon . friend is a strong campaigner for his constituents . he is right that that development will be a game changer . it will be important that we keep people ’s feet to the fire to deliver on what has been promised . i guarantee that he will have my full support and that of the entire ministerial team . with your permission , madam deputy speaker , i will now address the liberal democrat motion , beginning with its point about the cannibalising of nhs capital budgets to keep day - to - day services running . i am delighted to confirm from this dispatch box that this government have drawn a line under that appalling practice , to which the conservative party was utterly addicted . the treasury now has new fiscal rules to prevent that from happening again ; capital spending is safe in our hands . secondly , on reversing the so - called programme that we inherited on as somebody who had to put up with what i think was seven photo opportunities by previous conservative ministers — including one who is sat on the opposition front benches now — proclaiming that they were rebuilding whipps cross hospital with money that did not exist , it is clear that what needs reversing is the conservatives ’ chutzpah in saying that somehow they are the ones championing change on reforming pfi . some of us spent years trying to persuade ministers that we could reform the disgraceful spending on pfi — particularly private finance 2 — schemes brought in by the previous conservative administration . under those schemes , some trusts were spending £ 2 billion a year on repayments — more than they were spending on drugs . that is one way in which we could get some money for the new hospitals , so does my hon . friend agree that it is this government , rather than the opposition , who understand good public finances ? my hon . friend , who is a relentless campaigner for her constituents , is right : it was simply government by press release , with so many aspects of policy based on making announcements and unfunded spending commitments . when we came into government , we discovered a £ 22 billion black hole in the public finances , largely based on promises that had no funding whatsoever attached to them . that is the sort of behaviour that undermines trust in politics . on the liberal democrat proposal to create a taskforce , we have excellent teams working on the programme , and they are getting on with the job . we do not have a second to waste . setting up a new taskforce would simply mean further delay and distraction through process , rather than a laser focus on delivery . i know that members across the house share my outrage at the almost £ 14 billion backlog maintenance bill facing nhs trusts after years of historic under - investment . i understand that many in the chamber are concerned about the condition of the health facilities that serve their constituents , and i reassure them that my right hon . friend the chancellor has given us the funding to begin immediately reversing the trend of decline that started under the last government . this financial year , we are backing nhs systems through over £ 4 billion in operational capital ; a lifesaving cash injection of £ 750 million of targeted estate safety funding , as a vital first step towards fixing our crumbling estate ; and £ 440 million to tackle crumbling raac , keeping staff , patients and their families safe . we are empowering systems to manage their capital allocations locally and assign funding to local priorities , ensuring that money is spent as effectively as possible , as soon as possible . my local hospitals were evicted from the new hospital programme when the raac schemes came along . there was nothing to delay — there was no money there at all . does the minister recognise that some very innovative schemes are now going on locally ? we in the imperial college healthcare trust are partnering with paddington life sciences , imperial college in south kensington and white city , and the hammersmith and fulham industrial strategy to maximise the available resources so that we can rebuild three world - class hospitals . my hon . friend is making some very strong points on behalf of his constituents . we would certainly be very happy to work more with him on some of those innovations . so often , hospitals are anchor institutions — alongside universities — for driving forward innovation , harnessing the power of technology and contributing to the government ’s growth mission . there are huge opportunities there , and i would be happy to explore them further with my hon . friend . despite overwhelming support , the coventry and warwickshire integrated care board has decided to cut all beds at the ellen badger hospital in shipston - on - stour , an anchor building and community hospital that is at the heart of our town . does the minister agree that cutting such vital services is unacceptable , and that community hospitals play an important role in rural areas by providing equality of access to our health services ? the hon . lady is absolutely right that community hospitals play a vital role , and i share her disappointment with the decisions that are being made . the fact of the matter is that we are in a hole , and we have to dig ourselves out of that hole . it is going to take some time to do that . we are getting the public finances back on an even keel , we are getting our public services back to where they need to be , and we are getting the economy back on a sounder footing . as we make those achievements , i hope that we will be able to reverse some of the decisions that are being made — decisions that are , of course , damaging to the hon . lady ’s community — but we are in a very difficult position , and it will take some time for us to get over that . rose — if hon . members will bear with me , i will make a little bit more progress and then come back to them . many liberal democrat colleagues have made the argument that with hospitals in the state they are in , it is more important than ever to have a robust social care system in place . as the minister for care , i agree with them wholeheartedly , but it is simply not true to portray the government as sitting on their hands while baroness casey gets cracking on her vital work . in fact , we have hit the ground running through a plethora of measures . we have legislated for the first ever fair pay agreement for social care in order to tackle the 130,000 vacancies we see today . we have delivered an extra 7,800 home adaptations through the disabled facilities grant to change the lives of thousands more disabled people for the better . in the budget , the chancellor provided the biggest increase in carer ’s allowance since the 1970s , worth £ 2,000 a year to family carers and with an extra £ 3.7 billion for local authorities . we are not hanging around on more structural reforms , either . we are introducing new standards to help people who use care , their families and providers to choose the most effective new technology as it comes on the market . we are joining up care and medical records , so that nhs and care staff have the full picture they need to provide the best possible care , and we are training more care workers to perform more health interventions , helping people to stay well and at home . just two weeks ago , we announced a new qualification for social care staff , training them in artificial intelligence to automate routine tasks and motion sensors to detect falls . we are seizing the opportunities of care tech and harnessing it for the benefit of thousands who draw on care across our country . we are desperate to help the minister in this endeavour , and look forward to receiving our invitations to the cross - party talks , which have yet to be issued . however , the health and social care committee heard today from an organisation called think ahead , which is the only organisation in the country that trains mental health social care workers . i have just heard that the department of health and social care is not refunding that organisation . can the minister explain why ? i thank the hon . lady for that intervention . baroness casey is working at pace to get the commission up and running , and that will be launched this month . on her point about think ahead , the fundamental challenge we had with that programme was its relatively high unit costs . we are aiming to ensure that we deliver value for money for the taxpayer — i am sure that the hon . lady shares that objective . we have to ensure that we deliver a programme for mental health social care work that delivers not only the best possible outcomes for our communities , but the best possible value for taxpayer money . a lot has been done in the nine months since the election , but there is a huge amount more to do , and this government are getting on with the job . alongside the work i have described , the government are putting record levels of investment into healthcare , with capital spending rising to £ 13.6 billion over this year and the next . that includes £ 1.5 billion for new surgical hubs , diagnostic scanners and beds across the nhs estate , as well as new radiotherapy machines to improve cancer treatment ; over £ 1 billion to tackle raac and make inroads into the backlog of critical maintenance , repairs and upgrades across the nhs estate ; and over £ 2 billion to be invested in nhs technology and digital . we are also taking the pressure off our hospitals through care in the community , and i am sure the whole house will welcome the fact that we have recruited 1,500 extra gps on to the frontline . coming back to community hospitals , i came to this house to try to save teignmouth community hospital , which has been under threat of closure because torbay , its parent hospital , has such a massive maintenance backlog that it can not afford to maintain both itself and teignmouth hospital , so it is shutting down community hospitals . in devon , we have just three principal hospitals : north devon , which we understand is under pressure , torbay , which is under pressure , and exeter . we need the community hospitals . will the minister stop teignmouth hospital from being shut , so that we can maintain it until it can be rebuilt ? these decisions are the responsibility of icbs , and the icb is having to balance a range of pressures , as the hon . member points out , created largely by the neglect and incompetence of the previous government . it is now a question of icbs having to cut their cloth to make the finances work with the limited resources they have . i am afraid that is symptomatic of the mess we found when we took over on the royal sussex in my constituency is in desperate need of a new cancer centre , and i am delighted that the centre is being added to wave one . i would be even happier if the minister also added a new accident and emergency department , but we will come back to that another day . is the reality not that we all want to build these new hospitals , but we all have to be honest with the public about how we will pay for them ? the liberal democrats never are , and the motion is not . bringing forward construction dates is a multibillion - pound commitment , but all the motion talks about is creating a taskforce . is that not fundamentally unserious ? this is an incredibly serious issue , and we should put forward proper proposals . my hon . friend is an outstanding champion for his constituents . i noted the point he made about a&e ; that was nicely done . he is right in what he says about the motion . the broader point to make is that thanks to the necessary decisions that my right hon . friend the chancellor of the exchequer made in the autumn budget , we have generated the revenue that we will need to rebuild public services , and in particular our nhs , which was brought to its knees by the previous government . i can not claim to be a careful student of the liberal democrat manifesto for the last election , but i did notice that the revenue that would be generated by their measures was , i think , about £ 8.4 billion . last time i checked , that was significantly lower than the £ 23 billion raised by the chancellor ’s budget . the liberal democrats should probably get their calculators out and figure out exactly how they will generate this revenue , rather than criticising us constantly for the decisions we have taken . rose — i will just make a little more progress , if i may . we are committed to rebuilding our nhs and rebuilding trust in government . we will never play fast and loose with the public finances , and we will never try to pull the wool over the public ’s eyes . everyone in this house remembers , or should remember , that the last labour government cut waiting lists to their lowest level in history , raised patient satisfaction to the highest level in its history , and brought in historic health interventions , such as the smoking ban . what is less remembered is that they also delivered the largest hospital building programme in nhs history . all that meant that when the coalition took over in 2010 , it was presented with a strong national health service that was firing on all cylinders . tragically , that coalition government and their successor governments set about weakening and undermining every aspect of our precious nhs , to the extent that by the time this government took over in july , the nhs was well and truly on its knees . today , it once again falls to a labour government to take the necessary and right decisions for the future . we have now put the new hospital programme on a sustainable footing . it has a timeline that can be met , and a budget consistent with our fiscal rules . that is how we have turned the programme from empty rhetoric into reality , and in doing so , we have provided the construction industry and its supply chains with vital certainty , while also restoring confidence in public sector procurement . we are on the side of the builders , not the blockers . our plan is credible , achievable and fully funded . it is a programme grounded in fact , not fiction . i was born in tredegar , the very same town as aneurin bevan , so it is the privilege of a lifetime to be part of a government who are carrying his torch into the 21st century , building a generation of hospitals that would do nye proud . i call the shadow minister . we can all agree that we want a world - class nhs , and that includes having the very best hospitals , technology and staff . i have been delighted to see the brilliant facilities created in my area , including a new a&e in boston , new mental health wards at lincoln county hospital , and new operating theatres at grantham and district hospital . these upgrades mean that patients can receive the best possible care in appropriate settings , and staff can go to work each day proud of their workplace environment . however , we must be alive to the challenges that face the nhs . we live in an ageing society where people have more complex comorbidities . we also have a growing population , so there is more demand for services . in fact , the nhs treats 25 % more patients every single day than it did back in 2010 . new treatments , technologies and procedures have been developed , saving and improving lives , but they come at an ever more expensive price . we also had the covid pandemic , which i noticed the minister did not mention . according to the king ’s fund , in 2023 prices , spending on capital in labour ’s last year in office , 2009 - 10 , was £ 6.9 billion . in 2023 - 24 , that had nearly doubled to £ 11.4 billion . even before the pandemic , capital spending was nearly £ 1 billion higher than when labour left government . that helped us to open 160 community diagnostic centres and more than 100 surgical hubs , and to invest more in scanners , beds and operating theatres to deliver a million more checks , scans and procedures closer to home . we were committed to delivering the new hospital programme in full . there was more to do . the challenges were evolving , the demand for care was growing and the pressure on the nhs was ever increasing . it now falls to the labour government to address those problems . i want them to succeed — that is in all our constituents ’ interests — but what we have seen so far does not fill me with hope . one of the health secretary ’s first choices on entering government was to pause the new hospital programme and put its future at risk . that was despite the fact that he and the chancellor travelled the country throughout the election period , meeting candidates and promising a new hospital in their area . just like the government ’s promises to the farmers , the pensioners and businesses , those were hollow words . the conservatives committed to restoring and renewing our hospitals . my constituents in epping forest depend on the princess alexandra hospital in harlow , and on whipps cross hospital in leytonstone . despite labour making clear promises about those two vital hospitals prior to the election , the labour government have delayed their rebuilding . it is particularly galling because whipps cross has planning permission , and work on the car park has already started . does my hon . friend agree that the labour government should re - evaluate their priorities and crack on with delivering the rebuilds promised at the princess alexandra and whipps cross ? i absolutely agree that the labour government should do that , but unfortunately , we have learned that their promises do not mean much at all . on promises not meaning much , the hon . lady will be aware that the previous conservative government promised west hertfordshire a new hospital . in 2023 , they said it was fully funded , yet there is still not a spade in the ground . can she explain where that money disappeared to , please ? the previous secretary of state made it clear that the hospital was fully funded and would be built . what has changed since then is that we have a new government who made the choice not to build it . these are choices that the new government must own . when the government came to power , the secretary of state commissioned the darzi review , which highlighted the need for more capital investment in the nhs , but decided not to prioritise the delivery of the new hospitals . to govern is to choose , and the secretary of state has chosen not to deliver the hospitals . we set out our commitment to delivering them on time , with the agreement of the then chancellor . of course , spending decisions can not be made for a future parliament , but the secretary of state has chosen not to make the same commitment . it may be helpful i correct a couple of “ facts ” that the hon . lady has given . in his election literature , my predecessor as member of parliament for chelsea and fulham made the clear statement that he had secured the funds for the rebuilding and refurbishment of charing cross hospital . when i spoke to the chief executive of the hospital , he said that he had received no such reassurance from the government , and on coming to power we found that no money had been set aside for the guaranteed refurbishment . moreover , this did not just apply to charing cross hospital . across the country , the last government ’s claims to have found the funding were discovered not to be true when we came to power . i am afraid that the hon . gentleman is not correct . the previous government , and the previous chancellor , made a clear commitment to providing the money , and to the hospital building project , but the current government have not chosen to meet that commitment . these are choices that are being made . for now , patients and staff are being denied the quality facilities that they have deserved for decades . for some hospitals , construction work will not even begin until 2039 . will the minister write to me , giving the date on which each hospital will be completed ? we can see the labour government ’s lack of ambition . there are 40 hospitals in waves 1 to 3 of their programme—40 hospitals over 15 years — but there are 515 acute , specialist and community hospitals in england . at this pace , the replacement of the nhs estate will require a cycle of nearly 200 years . that is the equivalent of a hospital built in 1825 not being replaced until this year . that is labour ’s ambitious programme . we can all see the pressures facing the chancellor as her economic mismanagement hits the country . we can not tax our way to growth . perhaps that is yet another reason why growth forecasts have been cut yet again . how do we know that labour will not come for those already delayed new hospitals in a year or two , and that there will not be further delays or cancellations ? the government have made it clear that the new hospitals are not their priority . will the minister give us that guarantee ? may i return the hon . lady to the subject of charing cross hospital for a moment ? it used to be the main hospital in my constituency , before it became part of the constituency of my hon . friend has the hon . lady been living in a different world for the last decade ? in that time , there has been not just underfunding , but threats to demolish and close hospitals , and then to remove them from a programme that the conservatives invented . only now is this hospital in a viable programme , and being given the help and support that it needs to become the world - class hospital that it has been . i must confess to not being terribly au fait with the position of charing cross hospital in 2012 , which was before i was elected . it is not a hospital in which i have worked as a doctor , but i am advised that it was my right hon . friend will labour — in an attempt to fill the black holes of their creation — return to private finance initiative contracts , to bridge the gap between the spending that they want and the fiscal situation that they have created ? i saw at first hand the disastrous agreements that were reached , which led to extortionate costs and ridiculous inflexibility . let me give just one example . i remember being very pleased to have an office of my own for the first time when , as a doctor , i was promoted . i was given a desk , a computer and a large whiteboard . when i asked , “ how do i get this put up on the wall ? ” , i was told , “ you ca n’t have it put up on the wall , because it would cost £ 800 . ” that was more than a decade ago . i thought , “ why is it costing £ 800 ? ” and i said , “ i can go and buy some ‘ no nails ’ from the local hardware store and put it up myself ! ” i was then told , “ you ca n’t do that , because a deal was negotiated , and it would be against the contract . ” in total , there are about 700 pfi contracts with a capital value of £ 57 billion , and there is about £ 160 billion still to be paid for them and their maintenance . during covid , in 2020 - 21 , analysis from the guardian found that nearly half a billion pounds was being spent purely on interest charges . that is money that is not being spent on patient care , and it is a long - lasting legacy from the last time a labour government were in power and trying to get around their fiscal rules . these were fundamentally bad deals . yet again , we see that when labour negotiates , the taxpayer loses . despite 14 years in opposition , labour came to office without a plan for what it actually wanted to do for the nhs . instead , we have seen review after review and consultation after consultation , with very little action or delivery in return for what this means for patients and the taxpayer . the labour government hiked taxes on general practices , community pharmacies and even children ’s hospices , only to give them some of that money back and expect them to be grateful for it . they cut the winter fuel payment for millions of the most vulnerable people in the country , and then sat back and watched as the number of pensioners attending a&e this winter soared . they caved in to the trade union demands with an inflation - busting pay rise in return for no modernisation or productivity reforms , and the threats to strike again are already back . they scrapped our productivity plan , which we had already fully funded and which would have unlocked billions in savings by the end of the decade . i have a question to which i know the answer . the question is “ how many new hospitals were built in the last five years ? ” and the answer , of course , is “ zero ” . is it not the case that the 40 new hospitals promised by the last government were not new and were not hospitals , and there certainly were not 40 of them ? actually , we use the definition of “ new hospitals ” that tony blair used when he was prime minister . let us turn to where we are now . we welcome the capital funding to continue the programmes that we started in government for new surgical hubs and diagnostics , but how much of the additional capital funding allocated in the last budget will be used to carry out repairs in hospitals that should be rebuilt ? let me repeat the question asked by the liberal democrat spokesperson , ultimately , these are decisions for governments . to govern is to choose . this government must own their choices , but sadly it is the public who will have to pay for them . rose — order . i must now announce an immediate five - minute time limit for back - bench speakers , with the exception of the chair of the select committee . a few months ago i stood in this chamber and told a story that i wished i did not have to tell . it was about my 91 - year - old grandmother , and the night that we had to rush her to hospital with a suspected heart attack , only to be told on arrival that the average waiting time was nine and a half hours . our brilliant nhs staff worked tirelessly , but after 14 years of tory neglect the truth is painfully clear : our health service has been pushed to breaking point , and my family did not receive the urgent care that we needed and deserved . i know that my story is not unique . i hear it time and again , on the doorstep , in community centres and in my constituency surgeries . there is a painful fear , shared by so many , that the nhs on which we all depend will not be there when we need it most . let us be honest about why that is : it is not because our nhs staff are not working hard enough — far from it . they are heroes in every sense of the word . i thank my hon . friend for giving way on his point about how brilliant our nhs staff are . first , will he commend my dad for his 40 years ’ service badge as an nhs staff member ? that has to be put on the record . secondly , does my hon . friend agree that the government are laser - focused on supporting nhs staff to stay in the nhs , work their way up the ranks and lead a fulfilling career in serving our constituents ? i thank my hon . friend for her intervention , and for the work that her family have done for our national health service . it is not the staff ’s fault that our nhs has been let down ; it is because of tory government after tory government , and decision after decision . fourteen years of conservative mismanagement have hollowed out our health service , and i welcome the opportunity to discuss this important issue today . although i might not see eye to eye on everything with the liberal democrats , there is one truth that we can not ignore : the nhs is facing serious challenges , and real change and investment are needed . however , people back home are not crying out for more motions ; they are crying out for action , for delivery , and for change that they can see and feel . with this labour government , they are finally getting it . when we came into office , we did not come in to manage decline ; we came in to turn things around , to rebuild , and to restore a sense of hope and pride in our public services , starting with our nhs . we have seen that work across the country , with waiting lists falling for six months in a row . in my city , this government have finally secured funding for the new women and children ’s hospital that residents in milton keynes — a growing city — so desperately need , and construction is set to start in 2027 - 28 . for too long , families have walked through the doors of my local hospital , which is simply not fit for purpose and has some of the longest waiting lists in the country . let me be clear : it is completely unacceptable that it has taken this long to get funding in place . milton keynes has been one of the fastest growing cities in the country for years , and we have been left with far fewer hospital beds than we deserve and far fewer than the national average . despite some of the comments from conservative members , and despite the conservative government plastering the new hospital on all their leaflets , how much funding was actually secured by my hospital under the last conservative government ? given that it was “ fully funded ” , one would assume the figure was 100 % . was it 50 % or 10 % ? no , just 4 % of the “ fully funded ” hospital promised was actually secured by the previous government . it is this government who have found the other 96 % to ensure that we can finally build the hospital that my city so desperately deserves . we are now trying to deliver a hospital that has been delayed not by local failure , but by national dither . thanks to this government , i get to be the mp who delivers what tory mp after tory mp promised my city but failed to deliver . i want to ensure that we do not face further delays — not just because of the health risks to my city , but because of the cost increases . i have been told that every single month this project is held up costs an extra £ 700,000 . that £ 700,000 could be invested in other important projects that have been mentioned by members across the house . one potential hold - up is the hospital 2.0 programme , which i am told is still not complete . will the minister look at whether that important work will hold up projects that we know are ready to go , such as in milton keynes ? we need to fast - track these projects through the treasury to ensure that there are no further bureaucratic blockages once the go - ahead has been given , especially bearing in mind that we have a track record in milton keynes of building to budget and on time . give us the tools and we will build the hospital . we must also be honest about what happens after the ribbon is cut . even if we build the hospital , our health system in milton keynes will still be operating under immense strain . thanks to the legacy of the last government , our integrated care board is one of the most , if not the most , underfunded per person in the entire country . that has real consequences . it means that places including my local hospice , willen hospice , which has provided vital end of life care to many members of my family , are being left to scrape by . this sunday i will be running the london marathon for our local hospice , because i care deeply about the work it does . marathons should not be the funding model for our healthcare system . we need sustainable investment , which starts with fairer funding for our icb and fairer treatment for a city that has been overlooked for too long . i will support anything in this house that helps us fix our nhs , and i will work with anybody who wants to rebuild it , but i will also say this : i am proud to be a member of a government who are finally not just talking about the problem , but getting on with the solution . let us build that hospital , let us fund our services properly , let us fix what is broken , and let us give people back the healthcare system they so desperately deserve . i call the chair of the health and social care committee . lord darzi ’s independent investigation clearly set out the impact that “ capital starvation ” has had on the nhs in recent years , and the importance of capital spending to fixing the health service . the report highlighted substantial shortfalls in capital investment , combined with a tendency to raid capital budgets to cover in - year spending deficits , so i welcome today ’s liberal democrat motion , which allows parliament to highlight how important these issues are to the public . this is the second liberal democrat opposition day , and it is the second time we have debated health and social care . it is because it is a priority for the country that it is a priority for us . the health and social care committee has taken a keen interest in the new hospital programme . we have challenged the government to maintain their capital spending and not fall into the traps of the past , when capital spending was redirected to fund day - to - day spending , so i was pleased to receive confirmation from the department , and now from the dispatch box , that the chancellor ’s changes to the fiscal rules will stop future raids on the capital budget , or cdel , to fund the day - to - day spending budget , or rdel . that is hugely welcome . however , although the protection of capital budgets is reassuring , i remain concerned about the lack of transparency around how the funding is allocated by the treasury . the charge levelled at the government is that funding is being funnelled into acute care to tackle waiting lists , at the expense of funding primary care , infrastructure and care in the community . clearly , on current commitments , we will not see capital funding that is sufficient to meet anything close to the unfunded promises made by the tories in 2020 . nevertheless , the principle of investing in our hospital infrastructure is good ; money will be saved in the long run on maintenance and emergency repairs , as well as providing a better quality of care . in the policy paper on the plan for implementing the new hospital programme , the government stated that funding will reach only £ 3 billion in the early 2030s due to “ other key priorities in health spending , such as funding to enable the secretary of state ’s 3 shifts ” . that is good , but we need transparency around how decisions were made and which projects were chosen . in january , the secretary of state provided the criteria by which the schemes were scored and funding was allocated , such as site constraints and maturity of planning permission , but it is disappointing that , as i understand it — i am willing to be corrected — the review was conducted without the involvement of the trust teams responsible for delivering the rebuilding programmes . as of last month , no trust with a new hospital programme scheme has been provided with the full details of how it scored specifically against the criteria . the health and social care committee has asked how the department is prioritising schemes and has not received a clear answer , so my question is very simple : in the interests of transparency , will the secretary of state publish , for every single new hospital programme scheme that was subject to last year ’s review , the details and findings of the department ’s assessment of them against each of the criteria that were published alongside his statement in the house of commons on my local area , like so many others , has been affected by this issue . last year i visited the john radcliffe hospital , which serves much of oxfordshire , and i saw at first hand how its capacity to deliver care is being severely constrained by the size and condition of the physical estate . we went to visit the old site of the neonatal intensive care unit , which had to be moved because the staff were worried about the ceiling literally coming down on sick children and on incubators . it was atrocious . the john radcliffe hospital wants to be world - leading . it is a specialist tertiary care hospital , which means it is able to perform very specialist surgery , and it wants a new building to do that in . when it put to the government a bid for £ 28 million , it was rejected . instead , it has gone out to seek private financing , and it will now cost the trust £ 46 million to deliver the exact same building . would it not have made sense for the government to allow the trust to borrow from the government to build it , and then to pay the money back from its own reserves over time ? think what it could have done with that £ 18 million . i know the john radcliffe hospital , which serves some of my constituents . the hon . lady has made a powerful case about the amount of money that has potentially been lost through this process . would she , however , reflect on the role played by her party , particularly i have to say that that was quite a segue . we are focusing on the capital estate . we all know that there were problems with the lansley reform . in fact , i welcome the fact that it is being unravelled , and i was pretty vocal about it at the time . the savings the john radcliffe could have realised might have been spent on hospital at home services and other ways to divert people away from coming into a&e in the first place . across the wider oxford university hospitals nhs foundation trust , £ 100 million of backlog is deemed as high or significant risk . pausing or delaying plans to rebuild hospitals is a false economy , and hospitals around the country , including the john radcliffe , are overspending on maintenance as a result . that is not limited to our hospitals ; we are also seeing it in gp practices , many of which date from well before 1948 . i will declare an interest in that my own surgery — the summertown health centre — is one of those practices . it is doing incredibly well , despite working out of a very old victorian building . it is desperate for a new site , and it was deemed one of the top priorities for the icb . i note that the minister mentioned a figure of £ 102 million , but , frankly , that does not touch the sides . as in the case of the john radcliffe , the summertown health centre is now going out to seek private finance , which it will find a way to pay back slowly over time . the exchequer would not even have to lay out this money in advance , and even with inflation , the amount it would get back is less than what the health centre has to pay to do this with private finance . i ask the government to think about this innovatively . it is not the same as the pfi . it is the government using their own borrowing rules to allow investment in vital public services , and it makes no sense that they can not do it . when it comes to mental health services , we have the incredible warneford hospital in oxfordshire , and warneford park in oxford will provide a new cutting - edge mental health hospital surrounded by a research and innovation hub . groundbreaking research is planned on understanding brain health and discovering new drug therapies and new forms of treatment . this is a great vision , but it will cost £ 500 million . we do have private benefactors , including local businesses , willing to feed into it , but where is the funding pot for mental health trusts ? they were excluded from the new hospital programme , and it is not at all clear where that kind of money may be found . i would like to share a story from a constituent who called me last night . her daughter had psychosis and was locked in a room at the local hospital , with a mattress on the floor and two security guards outside . she was there for a week waiting for mental health provision in a setting outside the hospital . i would like the minister to tell me what mental health provision will be in place . i am so sorry to hear about the experience of my hon . friend ’s constituent . in lord darzi ’s report , there are some stark pictures of him sitting in substandard accommodation for the very sickest in our society . the health and social care committee is currently undertaking an inquiry into severe mental ill health , because we know that mental health is so often forgotten in the nhs . it is good that the mental health investment standard has been continued , but it is sad that the overall spend as a proportion of nhs spend is going down this year for the first time in the last few years . we very much hope that this is not a trend , but a one - off , and that it will continue to rise from next year . for the warneford , we need to understand what new innovative funding pots we can put together . we understand that the government are working across departments , and this project would be as much of an advantage to the department for science , innovation and technology as to the department of health and social care . where are these pots of money , because they are important ? i will end simply by saying that i completely agree with the thrust of the motion — and , indeed , with what the government have themselves said — which is that if we invest in capital expenditure , we need to take an invest to save approach . we know that this matters to our constituents , and we know that they can not get the services they so desperately need . if we are to achieve the three shifts , we should not be pitting them against each other . investing in capital will help the three shifts to succeed , and we do will the government and the nhs to succeed . with an immediate four - minute time limit , i call emily darlington . i thank for me , the story about milton keynes hospital is really personal , as it involves my family and my in - laws . unfortunately , i lost both my in - laws in the years leading up to my being elected to this place . what i would like to say about the care my family , my in - laws and my children have had is that the team at milton keynes hospital — the staff from the chief executive to the consultants , the doctors , the nurses and the porters — are all so professional . i am sure everyone in this house would want to join me in thanking them for their absolute persistence in the work they have had to do just to keep the nhs going over the last 14 years . i worked closely with the hospital in my constituency for many years as deputy leader of milton keynes council , and the council had to step in when the government did not . it was with funding from the council that we were able to build the new cancer centre and the new radiotherapy unit that will open very soon . it is because of the close working relationship with the council that the hospital has some of the lowest bed blocking waits in the country . with our teams integrated into the hospital , we make sure that the people who are able to go home go home with a care package as soon as possible , because it is our belief in milton keynes , and it was my belief as deputy leader , that people want to be in their homes . despite all that work , milton keynes hospital has had some of the longest waiting lists in the country . that is partly due to the 14 years of underfunding of milton keynes . when there are over 30,000 people waiting for non - urgent elective operations , with 1,762 of them having been waiting for more than a year , these do not feel like non - urgent cases , because those people are not allowed to live a proper life , to play with their grandchildren or to go back to work as fast as they should . there is both a social cost and an economic cost . i am pleased to say that , with the investment by this government to reduce waiting times , we have seen waiting times go down , but they are still too long . unlike a lot of other hospitals we will talk about today , much of the issue for milton keynes is that it serves the fastest growing area in our region . in fact , it is growing at double the rate of anywhere else in the greater south - east . that means that our population is set to double to 410,000 people by 2050 . on average , 11 people move to milton keynes every single day . that is not new in milton keynes , because we have been developing communities , homes and businesses for quite some time under the leadership of the labour council . what has failed time and again in milton keynes is the investment that we need in our local hospitals , but this government and these milton keynes mps will actually deliver what was promised over and over again but never delivered by the conservative party . laying in an operating theatre , a patient at north devon district hospital in my constituency can take great comfort in knowing that they are surrounded by some of the most dedicated healthcare professionals in the world . but astonishingly , the operating theatre around them is little changed since it was first built in 1978 . the theatre is barely 60 % of the size the nhs now expects , and it can not accommodate more modern equipment . much of the air - handling system and ventilation infrastructure has either never been upgraded , or is simply beyond repair when it breaks down . that is a critical risk to patient care . north devon district hospital now has a maintenance backlog of £ 44 million , over £ 13 million of which is for its operating theatres alone . there are no independent providers , and the next nearest nhs acute hospital is more than 40 miles away . the trust says that failing theatre facilities are the most urgent threat it faces during the next five years — not 10 years , but five — so what happens next ? well , we know what happens , because that exact scenario struck torbay hospital in 2018 , with failing air - handling infrastructure closing down a number of operating theatres and causing widespread cancellations of surgery for more than a year . north devon district hospital faces the same nightmare . thanks to woeful behaviour by the last conservative government , not a single penny was put in place to do something about it . now the labour government say that none of the planned rebuild will be delivered until after 2035 . north devon is one of nine hospitals pushed right to the back of the line by the new hospital programme review , and the government still fail to recognise the increased maintenance costs that will flow from that decision . if the government ignore the symptoms , the problems will only get worse . our hospital trust has put forward alternative plans for a lasting refurbishment at north devon district hospital that would cost just £ 250 million — a fraction of what is really needed , but enough to keep the maximum number of operating theatres open beyond 2027 and avoid spiralling costs down the line . i thank the minister for agreeing to visit north devon district hospital to see the facilities and to listen to the trust board ’s proposals . i am really grateful to the minister for listening , but i urge the government to seize the initiative and act now before it is too late . in 2020 , the conservative government announced the new hospital programme . the prime minister at the time , known for his complicated relationship with the truth , said that spades were in the ground , but it is clear from their disastrous 14 years in power that we can not build on promises alone and we can not change the country on empty slogans . fast forward to today , and the labour government have committed to building the hospitals not just with words , but with cold hard cash and a credible plan for delivery . i note that the liberal democrats appear to try to draw a comparison between the inheritance left to the coalition government and that left to this government by the previous conservative government . i have to take the opportunity to remind them that the coalition government were left an nhs with the highest patient satisfaction on record and the lowest waiting lists on record . i welcome the progress made once again by this labour government in bringing down waiting lists six months in a row . i am delighted that leighton hospital in my constituency will be in wave 1 of the new hospital programme . leighton has been in desperate need of an upgrade for some time . building began on a new modular unit in january 2025 , with some services due to move there by the summer of 2025 . the original out - patient department has raac planks in the roof that are now well beyond their lifespan . recent risk assessments have graded the condition as catastrophic , with an incident likely . that compounds the betrayal of the empty promises from the previous government . the rebuild will mean that the hospital can serve my constituents , who desperately need medical facilities , for many years to come . the value of that is immeasurable . i also welcome the government ’s commitment to changing the way we use health services . the nhs is our most beloved institution and it has served us effectively for a long time , but it must adapt . that is why i particularly welcome plans to turn leighton into a health and care neighbourhood , transforming it into a site where provision is joined up ; a place where resources are utilised well and people are actively involved in their care ; a place where technology , digital and data help both proactive and personalised care to be more effective ; and a place where we look after each other , we collaborate and people join forces to improve the whole . in my constituency , there has been a popular campaign for a general hospital for many decades without success . given that we did not even make it on to boris ’s fantasy list of 40 hospitals , we are certainly not going to succeed now . in the absence of that hospital , what we need is a strategy to move more of the treatments for which distance really matters into smaller local clinics . in horsham , that might include wound dressing and sexual health services . does the hon . member agree that if we are going to continue to be denied the hospital we deserve , the kind of localised treatment strategy he is suggesting could be implemented at very low cost ? i agree with the hon . member that we must move care into the community . where we are not able to build hospitals as quickly as we would like to , community care is so important . the nhs needs to be reformed to serve an ageing population , taking long - term patient care out of hospitals and putting care back into the heart of communities . we need more joined - up proactive , health and social care services , and we need to change our mindset from sickness to prevention . in support of that , the nhs confederation set out in a recent report that working more at the neighbourhood level , which the government intend to do , can improve people ’s health and wellbeing . i appreciate the efforts and sentiments from the liberal democrats today , but big promises with no clear plan are what got us into this mess to begin with . empty words to gain votes have destroyed voters ’ confidence in our politics , and only a sensible government with a credible plan for delivery of their commitments will restore that trust , so i am thankful that this government ’s approach has been to set out a clear plan to deliver . labour is the party of the nhs , from the original conception of the service back in the ’ 40s to the modern day . i am confident that , as we have already seen in the example i cited from leighton , this government will deliver for the british people . i am grateful for the chance to speak in today ’s debate and to be able to give voice to so many of my constituents ’ frustrations about how their right to access quality healthcare has been deprioritised by this labour government . many of my constituents , especially those in the north of my constituency , are served by the epsom and st helier university hospitals nhs trust . to be blunt , the situation at the trust today is simply not sustainable — clinically , financially or structurally . the trust currently operates two acute hospitals , in epsom and st helier , with duplicate services spread across both sites . the arrangement , while a product of historical necessity , today places considerable pressure on clinical teams . allocation of staff members between sites is challenging and service delivery is stretched . no matter how committed the staff — their dedication is beyond question — they are constantly being asked to do more with less , in buildings that are often quite literally falling apart around them . to give just one brief example , earlier this year st helier was forced to cancel scheduled blood tests because of widespread flooding in the phlebotomy section . we simply can not go on like this . indeed , time is not a luxury we have , with the estate now deteriorating faster than it can be fixed . the trust is spending millions every year simply to keep the most urgent problems at bay : patching leaks , coping with flooding , and addressing the worst outbreaks of damp and mould . i think we all agree that these are not the conditions in which 21st - century healthcare should be delivered . that is why it was so disappointing to learn earlier this year that the planned specialist emergency care hospital in sutton — a long - standing scheme under the new hospital programme that was carefully conceived to address the very issues i have mentioned — has been delayed to the point that work will now not even begin until 2030 to 2035 , with opening coming in 2037 at the earliest . the new hospital will consolidate emergency care into one state - of - the - art facility , delivering world - class treatment , faster access to care , and safer outcomes . at the same time , it will allow for major investment at epsom and st helier hospitals , helping to modernise crumbling buildings , improve planned care pathways and ensure that most services remain close to home . under the trust ’s plans , 85 % of services would remain on the epsom and st helier sites , including out - patient care and diagnostic appointments . local people would continue to receive the vast majority of their care where they always have done , but would benefit from shorter waiting times and access to better facilities , particularly for surgery . i passionately believe that the new hospital at sutton is a once- in - a - generation chance to overhaul healthcare provision and ensure that my constituents receive the high - quality care they deserve in a timely fashion . the new sutton hospital will sit in my constituency . in 2020 , we were promised by the former member for sutton and cheam that the hospital would open in 2025 ; indeed , he continues to have that claim on his website . does the hon . lady agree that the failure to deliver any new hospital in sutton borough , whether at belmont or st helier , is entirely down to the failure of the previous government to fund and bring forward these projects while they were in power ? i can confirm to the hon . member that if the conservatives were in power , we would be delivering that hospital . i want to be clear : the trust is ready to move forward , and clinical consensus has been secured ; what is now urgently needed is commitment from the government to drive the programme forward . after all , patients and staff alike deserve better than to spend another decade or more in facilities that are not fit for modern healthcare delivery . they deserve to know that promises made through the new hospital programme will be honoured , not quietly shelved or endlessly deferred by this government . i urge ministers in the strongest possible terms to look again at the decision to delay sutton emergency care hospital and to provide the long - term certainty the trust needs to proceed — not in 2035 , but now . i am glad that we are taking the time today to discuss the immensely important issue of the state of our nhs hospitals . nowhere is it more obvious that our nhs has been broken over the past 14 years than in our crumbling nhs estate . our nhs has been starved of capital funding , and the backlog maintenance bill now stands at more than £ 11 billion . research from the nhs confederation shows that nine in 10 nhs leaders believe that the crumbling nhs estate is undermining their ability to tackle the elective backlog . this is devastating . it is apparent in my constituency , with hillingdon hospital plagued by flooding , sewage overflows , failing lifts and outdated equipment . the need for a new hospital in hillingdon is not new — my predecessor ’s predecessor described the hospital as no longer fit for purpose many years ago , and pledged at the time to replace it . the lib dems are right today in their condemnation of the previous government ’s record , with their fantasy hospital programme that seemed to exist only in the mind of boris johnson , and never in the reality of the treasury ’s decisions . residents in uxbridge have been led up the garden path time and again , with false promises upon false promises , a funding package that was never approved and building works that never began — to this day , not a stone has been laid and no ground has been broken . at the election , no business case had been agreed , the hospital design was still being tweaked , and no contractor had been appointed . rather than being fully funded , only £ 70 million of £ 1 billion had ever been provided . i am glad , therefore , that the labour government have prioritised capital investment , with capital spending increasing by £ 13.6 billion in the budget , and i am grateful for the progress we are now making with a realistic , honest and deliverable timescale for the programme . after years of broken promises , people are fed up and need action , delivery and credible commitments . that is why it is disappointing that the lib dem motion today , if approved , risks leading again to unfunded commitments , promising to deliver all the hospitals simply through a new taskforce . that is not how hospitals are built or paid for . it does not feel to me like a credible funded programme ; instead , it is a recipe for more talk , more delay and more inaction . i know that the community in uxbridge and south ruislip are now reassured that hillingdon hospital has been included in wave 1 , with a capital envelope agreed in recent weeks of nearly £ 1.4 billion . instead of more words or a taskforce , we have delivered solid agreements and funded commitments — a real plan for change . the hospital is now finalising its business case and design . a contractor will be appointed and on site in 2027 , and construction work will start in 2028 . it is essential that the new hospital programme continues to work at pace to provide my constituents and all residents in this country with the quality of care they deserve . i am sure the minister would expect all members to hold the government to account for the delivery of the programme . turning to the concrete actions we could take to deliver the hospital programme more quickly , long - term revenue funding for new wave 1 teams is much needed so that they can work at pace , as well as a simplified planning process for new hospitals . i welcome the government ’s planning reforms and planning and infrastructure bill . i hope that lib dem members will support the bill , which seeks to speed up the delivery of critical national infrastructure . as well as investment in hospitals , we need investment right across our nhs estate , as has been discussed today . i have met gps who are using store cupboards as consulting spaces and heard from pharmacies that want to do more but are desperately lacking the space to deliver pharmacy first services in privacy . the wakley centre , which provides sexual health services in my constituency , is crammed into an outdated building , using every inch of space , and is desperate for more modern space to do preventive work . i agree entirely with the hon . gentleman on the need for investment outside of hospitals , but does he agree that we also need smarter investment ? dorset nhs foundation trust , along with somerset nhs foundation trust and university hospitals dorset , has submitted a business case for an integrated electronic health record system that would allow them to work together , share information and , ultimately , save the nhs money . does he agree that this is exactly the kind of technological advancement the nhs should be funding ? we need to think not just about buildings , but about digital infrastructure and investment in a whole range of capital investment needs for the nhs for it to be a modern , fit - for - purpose service . it sounds like the measures the hon . gentleman suggests are sensible . there is a strong desire in the emerging 10 - year plan to shift to neighbourhood health services , which would also require capital investment . three neighbourhood hubs are planned in hillingdon , but there are still no clear sites and no capital investment to make them a reality . we need a long - term infrastructure strategy for the nhs , alongside our 10 - year health plan . i welcome the significant increase in capital spending for the nhs at the budget . i also think the government ’s new commitment to protect capital budgets in the nhs is vital . far too often , under the previous government , those budgets were raided for short - term investment to plug revenue - based gaps ; now that has come to an end , which is very welcome . my constituents have waited long enough for hillingdon hospital . we do not need more taskforces or reviews , but concrete funded plans of action . at last , we have from this new labour government a fully funded new hospital programme ready to be delivered . i look forward to construction starting and working with this government to deliver health services that are fit for the future . i fully support reversing the delays to the new hospital programme and want to emphasise the importance of investment in community health provision , which offers multiple benefits to patients and the health service . there is currently no out - of - hours healthcare provision anywhere in my constituency . patients typically have to travel to swindon , bath or salisbury for urgent medical treatment or , at best , the minor injury units in chippenham or trowbridge . most of the constituency , including melksham and devizes towns , has limited public transport options to get to major hospitals , with patients unable to travel by car facing lengthy bus journeys . in melksham , we already have a working community hospital that offers a range of healthcare services , from physio to consultant out - patient appointments , but it has been without a minor injuries unit since 2008 . on occasion , people in need of urgent treatment for cuts and broken bones turn up at the hospital only to be turned away without so much as a sticking plaster . that simply is not good enough . melksham is seeing ongoing development in and around the town , which is driving population growth , yet we have not seen the investment in services and infrastructure to match . if the long - term strategic goal is to shift more care out of larger hospitals and into community hubs , is there not a clear case to consider expanding services at under - utilised sites , such as at melksham community hospital ? investment in services , such as in a minor injuries unit at a melksham community site , not only offer greater convenience and potentially improved outcomes for patients , but is cost - effective , decreasing demand on overstretched services at major hospitals and reducing congestion on our roads . i very much hope that the department will consider the compelling case for upgrading community hospitals , and i would welcome the chance to meet the minister to discuss the specific case for melksham and to bring representatives from the friends of melksham hospital with me . it is a pleasure to follow the earlier speech of my constituency neighbour , my hon . friend we on the labour benches are incredibly proud of our nhs . it is one of our country ’s greatest achievements , and is founded on the principle that everyone , no matter their background or circumstances , should have access to high - quality healthcare that is free at the point of use . that simple idea has saved millions of lives , and offered comfort , healing and hope to generations . however , after 14 years of conservative failure , the nhs was left on life support , with record waiting lists , surgeries and appointments cancelled or delayed , a workforce worn down and undervalued , and hospitals crumbling . that is the legacy of the previous conservative government — a legacy of neglect , underfunding and broken promises . nowhere is that clearer than in the new hospital programme that they introduced in 2020 . this was meant to be their flagship plan to modernise the nhs estate — to replace crumbling buildings and ensure that patients and staff had the safe , modern environments that they deserve — but the scheme was built on shaky foundations . from the start , the scheme was plagued by delays , confusion and a complete lack of proper funding . the reality behind the headlines was that very few hospitals saw any real progress . in many cases , the money simply was not there . let me take the case of leighton hospital , which serves my constituents in northwich , winsford and middlewich , and four other hospitals across the country . all are known to be riddled with reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete . experts warned of a “ catastrophic ” risk to patient safety . structural engineers said an incident was “ likely ” . in simple terms , these buildings were falling down , but what did the previous government do ? when the programme was first published , the plans to rebuild those five hospitals were blocked . the previous government chose to ignore the warnings , ignore the patients and ignore nhs staff working every day in buildings that had been declared unsafe . it was not until 2023 that the previous government finally amended the new hospital programme to include leighton and the other raac - affected hospitals . by then , years had already been wasted — time that we did not have — and even that decision came without a real plan , without a timeline and , crucially , without the funding needed to do the job . what was offered to my local community was not a solution ; it was false hope dressed up as progress . the promises crumbled faster than the hospitals that the previous government failed to rebuild . in contrast , this government are delivering . we are not just talking about change ; we are making it happen . we are rebuilding the nhs from the foundations up and , just as importantly , rebuilding trust that the government will deliver on their promises on the nhs . at leighton hospital , we are proving it : the funding has been confirmed to the trust ; the ground investigations are under way ; and the project is moving forward . this is not just talk , but action . but let us be clear : rebuilding leighton is not just a matter of replacing concrete ; this is our opportunity to do something bigger . we have a chance to build a healthcare neighbourhood that reflects the future — a modern , resilient facility that will serve communities for generations to come and will meet the challenges of 21st century healthcare . this is not just about bricks and mortar ; it is about people , it is about care and it is about building a system that reflects our values . we are tackling the root causes of the crisis that the conservatives have left behind . we are reducing waiting lists through more appointments , better use of technology , and support for our overstretched staff . we are training and recruiting the doctors , nurses , and carers of the future . we are ending the sticking plaster politics of the last decade and a half and building an nhs that is fit for the future . in rural communities like mine , our issues are very often about the distances that we have to travel in order to get any kind of healthcare , but particularly to reach hospitals . in morecambe bay , which covers three quarters of my constituency population - wise , we are funded as if we have one hospital , but have to have three . one way that we have got around that is to have funding for gp surgeries to provide minor injury care in places like grange , ambleside , hawkshead and beyond — yet , as of tomorrow , the icb for lancashire and south cumbria will meet . on its agenda may or may not be , but jolly well should be , the decision to approve and to seek a new provider of gp services in the community of coniston . we have known for three months that the excellent dr frey and dr abbas were retiring and leaving their posts in july , and the icb has dragged its feet for three months , despite the community clamouring for action . we presented a petition of over 1,000 signatures in this place just a few weeks ago for there to be a replacement of the gp surgery to serve the community in coniston . when it comes to the new hospital programme , i acknowledge the fantasy figures behind the previous government ’s non - existent programme , but i point out that land is available in the larger district general hospital site serving lancaster in the southern part of my constituency . it is right next to the new medical school at lancaster university and it is absolutely shovel - ready . there is no logical reason for it to be in the last division of the third phase of the programme , which means that it will not be built until the 2030s . i urge the minister to think again on that point . the minister will be unsurprised to hear me use my last minute and a bit to talk about radiotherapy . in the northern part of my constituency , in places like appleby , people who have cancer are able to get good quality radiotherapy treatment at carlisle , but in the southern three quarters of my constituency , people have to make return journeys , sometimes of four hours a day for weeks on end , to get radiotherapy treatment at our nearest centre in preston . that is outrageous . that is why we are asking for there to be a satellite radiotherapy unit at the westmorland general hospital in kendal . this is not just about convenience . according to an oecd recommendation , radiotherapy should be the primary treatment for cancer in 53 % of cases ; shamefully , in the uk , it is in only 36 % of cases . lancashire and south cumbria ranks 42nd of 42 icbs , with only 29 % of people with cancer receiving radiotherapy . that is in no small part down to the failure to provide that treatment within our communities . it is absolutely the case that the longer the journeys to treatment , the shorter the life expectancy of the people suffering with cancer . i urge the minister finally to make the decision , which we have been demanding for years , to add to the chemotherapy service , to the diagnostics and to the cancer surgery that we now have at kendal . it was wonderful to win those campaigns , but the one thing that we are missing is radiotherapy . it is time that we brought it to the people of westmorland , so that they can have shorter journeys and longer lives . i have a unique case to make in this debate on behalf of my constituents and merton council . we do not want the new emergency hospital at belmont , which is in phase 2 of the hospital rebuilding programme . in direct contrast to the hospital will provide 80 fewer beds than we have at the moment , serve 83,000 fewer patients , and put increased pressure on st george ’s hospital in tooting and croydon university hospital — both hospitals that the care quality commission has said need fewer patients to arrive at their sites . this scheme would give them more patients . worse than that , it depends on a 3 % annual reduction in lengths of hospital stays and a 3 % annual reduction in activity . what hospital in the country has experienced a reduction in activity ? it is also based on increased access to mental health services , which should have been provided last year , the development of community paediatric pathways , a child development centre — yet to be seen — and the reopening of the wilson hospital in mitcham . that hospital has not been reopened ; the money has not been found , so it remains closed . the scheme is also dependent on an increase in home births in mitcham and morden , which has the highest levels of social housing , the greatest housing deprivation and the most overcrowded conditions in the region . this is the tudor hart law writ large , where hospital services are taken away from those who need them most and given to the areas that need them least . i ask the minister : save taxpayers ’ money . already £ 50 million has been spent consulting on this scheme . nobody wants it and nobody supports it . leave st helier hospital as it is . spend the money that the government have on st helier hospital and give better services to those who need them most . the motion starts by referring to “ hospitals across the country ” , but most of the debate today has been about england . i want to highlight the situation that has arisen from the decisions made in this house on capital investment and changes to fiscal rules , and how that affects northern ireland and the capital investment there . capital investment in the health estate in northern ireland has been broadly stable for the 15 years prior to 2019 — until 2020 when the covid pandemic brought about increased capital investment . the long tail of the pandemic , compounded by russia ’s invasion of ukraine , significantly disrupted global supply chains and increased construction costs . those price increases have compounded a subsequent and very serious problem in northern ireland : the outcome of the two most recent budgets , which has meant that the funding available for capital investment in northern ireland is now projected to be 16 % lower per head of population than england for ’ 25 - 26 , and therefore much lower than any assessed relative need would suggest . while i listened to the complaints of many english colleagues across the house about capital investment , in some cases i am quite envious of what they are being allocated , because it is a contrast to what we have . much of our health and social care capital budget is project - based . as the former minister of health in northern ireland , i am acutely aware that there is an increasing need to address the serious risks across our health and social care estate . that includes tackling its backlog maintenance liability , which currently sits at £ 1.4 billion . now , as a constituency mp , i see the impact of below - needs budgets on projects in south antrim . the new birch hill mental health centre is a much - needed , purpose - built facility to provide the very best environment for assessment , treatment and recovery . yet under the budget that the executive have provided the department of health , there is not enough to fund what has already been committed to , including the executive ’s flagship projects , to meet current contractual commitments , to progress projects in design or development , or to fund even limited maintenance of existing property assets . good projects and massive potential are being lost because the executive can not seem to think even six months down the line , never mind one or two years . nevertheless , birch hill remains high on the agenda of our department of health , and i hope that the executive parties responsible for funding allocations consider the consequences of their decisions and recognise the critical need for the project . for mothers and babies in northern ireland , it would also provide a centre for perinatal mental health and wellbeing . i join i must confess that i am slightly surprised that the lib dems have brought forward an opposition day debate about hospitals and are stating their case in such a way , because the last thing we need in this country is a load of promises we can not keep . i am proud that we government members have provided sustainable and affordable plans for the new hospital programme . i have been on the doorstep the last few weeks in the run - up to the county council elections , and the no . 1 priority that comes up is gp access . we have provided 1,500 new gp posts in this country , and waiting lists have been going down for the last five months . emergency dentistry is also very commonly brought up on the doorstep , and we have provided 700,000 new dentist appointments . there are many other parts of the nhs that are crumbling . i see the crumbling of the hospital buildings as a metaphor for what has happened to the nhs over the last 14 years . my hon . friend is talking about the important work done by lord darzi , and the findings on crumbling hospitals in england . he may be interested to hear that recent figures show that the bill for the high - risk repairs needed to scottish hospitals stands at £ 64 million . those repairs have not been carried out under the snp . they include two high - risk repairs that are badly needed , and have been outstanding since 2016 , at cameron hospital in fife , which is used by some of my constituents . does my hon . friend agree that the scottish government should use some of the record funding provided to them by this labour government to fix our hospitals in scotland ? of course it is essential that we maintain hospitals so that they are safe to treat patients in , so i agree with my hon . friend about spending the money . in fact , the backlog bill for repairs in the nhs runs to £ 13.8 billion . i work as a gp in a gp practice , and i note that lord darzi estimates that £ 37 billion more should have been spent on the nhs since 2010 , but was not . for those of us working in the nhs , it does feel like that . there is a massive building project ahead of us . i point out that the previous labour government built 100 new hospitals . one was the vale hospital in dursley , which we started in 2008 , and which i had a hand in . as hon . members have said , community hospitals such as vale hospital are crucial to how the nhs works . we must invest in our community hospitals and use them properly . the vale hospital provides excellent minor injuries unit services , a specialist stroke service and in - patient beds for the community . we must invest in our community hospitals going forward . as we have heard , there were meant to be 40 new hospitals in the last few years , but none of them got built , and it turned out that they were not even funded . we need to get care out of hospitals and back into the community . we must also integrate health and social care in the community , so that we can pull patients out of hospital . that also applies to emergency care , as far too many people are having to go to overwhelmed a&es at big district general hospitals . at the moment , only 20 % of acute admissions go through gps , who are the best people to ensure that we avoid admissions . we have to change all of this . our nhs staff and patients deserve better ; they deserve facilities that reflect the excellence of the care provided within them . the labour government are committed to rebuilding not just our hospitals , but trust , and the integrity of our public services . hospitals matter to everyone , but hospitals falling apart help no one — not patients , not staff and not the economy . the government have called the nhs “ broken ” . they rightly blamed the conservatives , and criticised the nhs ’s management under their leadership , so why are the government now making the same mistakes ? under the revised new hospital programme , the building of the royal berkshire hospital will not commence for another decade . there is little prospect of a new royal berkshire to serve the communities of henley , reading , newbury , bracknell and windsor until the 2040s . doctors who have worked in the nhs for over 30 years believe that they will never work in modern buildings . the cancer centre alone is 164 years old . my hon . friend talks of members of staff with long service . a former nurse with 40 years ’ experience in the nhs recently contacted me . she took her husband , who has complex needs , into hospital , as he had a hand infection , and they were forced to wait for over 12 hours in a tiny cubicle with no ventilation . it pained me to hear that story . she worked so hard for the nhs , which she felt was down on its knees . does my hon . friend agree that this is a damning indictment of the state of our hospitals , and that we urgently need to pursue a major 10 - year capital investment programme to get them back up to speed ? my hon . friend is right to point out the impact of the state of the nhs on the brilliant people who work there . my sister is a nurse in the royal preston hospital , and she tells me just how hard it is to walk past people who are being cared for in corridors . every week at the royal berkshire , an operation is cancelled due to power cuts , water supply issues , broken lifts or malfunctioning temperature controls . those are lost appointments and lost efficiency for the nhs . floods and sinkholes plague the foundations of the royal berkshire hospital , which now requires relocation , and identified suitable sites are set to be put on the market at the end of this year . further inaction by the government will mean that those carefully laid plans and that funding will amount to nothing . there are also hospitals that were never considered for the programme , as my hon . friend staff told me that cramped conditions make it difficult to take breaks during the day . one worker showed me their windowless cupboard office — hardly great for their own mental health . staff also told me how working in georgian buildings impacts the quality of their work . sight lines in common rooms are obstructed by pillars ; rooms are difficult to heat ; and security is difficult to maintain . a new warneford would cost a fraction of the price of a physical health hospital , and the government promised to put mental health on the same footing as physical health , so why does the revised new hospital programme not include a single mental health facility ? both the warneford and the royal berkshire have been devastated by the government ’s lack of foresight . the cuts to hospital spending are a decision made to save money , but that is a false economy . over the next 10 years , repairs to the royal berkshire hospital are projected to cost £ 400 million — a quarter of the cost of a new hospital . add to that the many other neglected hospitals , and the loss is unthinkable . proper investment in modern infrastructure is needed now . in my constituency we have the townlands memorial hospital , which shows how good the nhs can be with modern infrastructure . anyone who receives care there , whether through the royal berkshire nhs foundation trust or the oxford health nhs foundation trust , sings its praises . it hosts over 30 specialities and plans to expand further . let us give our hospitals the chance to excel . rose — order . there is an immediate three - minute time limit . it is a pleasure to speak in the debate . the previous government made off - the - cuff commitments to new hospitals that were never going to be affordable or deliverable ; i am really proud to be part of a labour government who commit only to what we can afford . we stick to our promises and deliver them . the rapid progress that we have made towards improving the nhs , reorienting it towards frontline delivery , is a fantastic example of that . over 3 million more appointments were delivered in the first nine months of this government — that is well ahead of the target — and over 100,000 people have been treated on time . those are great statistics , but when i knock on doors and meet residents , i hear about the difference that that has made to them and their families . people are back on their feet , back at work , and back being active parents and grandparents sooner than they could have imagined . this is politics that is delivering for people . it is not the politics of easy answers , but the politics of progress , and of change to people ’s lives . i will highlight one change that will be particularly important in my constituency of aylesbury as we continue the work of transforming the nhs , including through the new hospital programme : the need to better integrate primary and secondary care . there is great potential for savings there , if we think about the secondary and primary care estates in the round . more importantly , that will help bring traditionally hospital based - care closer to the community ; it will be better care that has better outcomes for people . as i have said in this place before , we face an acute challenge in aylesbury with our gp surgeries . we had new housing estates built in a poorly planned way under the previous government , without the necessary gp services being provided . we also have particularly high levels of deprivation in aylesbury and the county of buckinghamshire — it is really marked by inequalities — which contributes to the pressures on our gp services . the government have already made significant progress in improving gp provision ; 1,500 new gps have been recruited , and successful negotiations with the british medical association have resulted in the biggest uplift in funding for gps in years . i think that will start to make a real difference . has the hon . lady had any feedback , in conversations with her gps , about what the increased employer national insurance contributions will do to their growth of provision ? i am in regular contact with my gps , and i know that they are really pleased , actually , with the uplift in funding that they have received through the contract , and with what they will be able to deliver with that . as we think about the future of hospital provision , we must think about our healthcare in the round — what each community needs more broadly , and how we join up hospital services with those provided by our gps , and with other community services . i am really excited by the work already under way in buckinghamshire to establish integrated neighbourhood teams and i am pleased at this government ’s commitment to neighbourhood health centres . in buckinghamshire , and particularly in aylesbury , all our key health organisations are coming together — including the acute and community nhs trusts , primary care , the local authority , public health , the mental health trust and voluntary sector organisations — to agree a collective plan for the next 10 years , which i think could be transformative . they are pooling their collective resources and teams across stoke mandeville hospital and three primary care networks , and looking not only at creating a centre in aylesbury for shared delivery of services , but at providing better care out in the communities . as we build our hospitals of the future across the country , it is essential that we plan in that way — not just for in - hospital care , but for a joined - up approach across all our services , bringing that care closer to our communities . ultimately , that is what people want and what people need : a future healthcare system in which as many people as possible can access care close to home and manage their health in their own homes and their own communities as best as possible . many of our hospitals are crumbling , but even those that appear sound may contain hidden dangers , notably asbestos . last week i met a constituent who is suffering from mesothelioma , contracted from asbestos . he was very concerned that so many of our hospitals and other public buildings still have asbestos within them , putting more people at risk of getting that terrible disease . we need a proper survey to find out where all that asbestos is and a plan for its safe removal . i was pleased to hear the minister talk about the work he is trying to do to get more funding for gps , because that is one of our big problems in ely and east cambridgeshire . a while ago , when we nearly lost our gp in sutton , residents were told , “ never mind — you can go to nearby gps . ” in rural areas , however , a gp even a few miles away is inaccessible to anyone who does not have a car . more recently , unexpected changes to the bus route with no notice left patients of the bottisham practice suddenly unable to get to their gp . we have seen a lot of new build around my constituency , not least in soham , which desperately needs a larger surgery . i went there and saw the conditions staff were working in , the tiny space they now have for their pharmacy area and the difficulties they face in serving a much larger community than the surgery was built for . the practice has been trying for years to get a new surgery , but the procedure for keeping or enlarging a surgery or building a new one is incredibly complex , and gps must put together funding from a range of sources . those gps should be spending their time trying to help patients , but they are instead spending their time building business plans and looking for funding . as we heard earlier from a government member , we desperately need nhs dentists in my constituency too , and they in turn will need premises . we do not have any major hospitals in ely and east cambridgeshire , but we rely on those elsewhere to be in good condition when we need them . we need our own princess of wales hospital to be in good condition , and we need excellent gp surgeries and nhs dentists who can serve us into the future . today ’s debate is a welcome chance to talk about the challenges of our health service . the darzi report was a stark demonstration of the state in which the health service was left by the last government . i know that part of the game today is for our colleagues on the liberal democrat benches to say , slightly deceitfully , “ oh , the labour mps are supporting the delay . ” , but members across the house will know , if we are honest with ourselves , that we can not delay something that was not going to happen . what of our inheritance ? it stretched far further than just the buildings ; it included the staff and the patients in them , weakened by austerity and decimated by covid . lord darzi talked about £ 37 billion of under - investment in our hospital buildings in the 2010s . on top of that , what else did we inherit ? does my hon . friend share my real discomfort at the gall of i think if what have we inherited ? we inherited 14,000 unnecessary deaths in a&e alone each year . nhs waiting lists peaked at 7.7 million . that is people waiting anxiously , needing treatment , tumours growing , their bodies getting further from being well , and every day 2,000 people were being sent to hospital who did not need to be there , because social care had been failed and forgotten by the previous government and by the coalition government . in my constituency , that means 20 % of beds in our hospitals are taken up by people who do not need to be there . we have work to do , and i am concerned that in this debate we will get caught up in a discussion about hospitals and will not fix the systems within them that we need to fix . that is why we have talked about three shifts . the first is from hospital to community . we have to stop people needing hospital care because they have been failed by care closer to home . that is why our revolution in gps will make a real difference . the second is the shift from fitness to prevention . we can have the best buildings , but with less prevention they will still be full . finally , there is the shift from analogue to digital ; every week , the health and social care committee hears about people caught between systems and between computer systems . although i welcome this debate , we must not fetishise buildings over people . we need to think holistically about our system and deliver the decade of national renewal that the public voted for . we need to look at all of our health service , across parties and in good faith . my constituents are predominantly served by two hospitals : frimley park to the east and basingstoke and north hampshire to the west . some 65 % of frimley park is raac concrete , known to be highly unstable , so it is right that it is included in phase 1 of the new hospital programme and prioritised as urgently needing a complete new build . basingstoke and north hampshire hospital , however , has been moved to phase 3 and building is now scheduled to begin some time between 2037 and 2039 , leaving staff and patients to endure the crumbling buildings for another 15 years . that decision was made without a single ministerial visit — not one . however , i have visited the hospital and seen what is needed , so i can tell ministers about the repairs needed to the ceiling to stop rain coming into patient wards and the windows that can not open , can not close or are not double - glazed . i can tell ministers about the air conditioning and filtration systems that keep the air clean in the hospital ’s operating theatres , which are already at their maximum capacity . replacing those systems will become essential within five years , and there is no physical room to add to what is there . i can tell ministers about the flooring that connects two important parts of the hospital over a car entrance , which is in a poor state and held together with industrial tape . patients are being trolleyed across that uneven , unstable flooring on a daily basis . the tape holding the site together is both literal and a metaphor for the state of the system and of hospitals right now in this country . ministers would know that if they had visited the hospital . one third of the repairs needed are high - risk — not a phrase we want to hear associated with our hospital structures and systems . i completely agree with my hon . friend that in none of the repairs we are talking about to our hospital infrastructure do any of us want to use the phrase “ high - risk ” . stepping hill hospital serves my constituents ; i have met the minister about it and i look forward to welcoming her to visit it later this year . despite needing a reported £ 134 million spent on it , stepping hill is not on the new hospital programme . i am sure my hon . friend agrees that the health of our nation is directly related to the wealth of our nation , and that investing in hospital infrastructure is thus an extremely good investment in all of our population . i thank my hon . friend for her intervention . health and wealth are two sides of the same coin and we need to invest in both , which is why the delays are a false economy . maintaining basingstoke and north hampshire hospital for the next 15 years will cost almost as much as the rebuild , making it a false economy and a categorically bad financial decision as well as a bad health decision . there is no point in investing in a multimillion - pound brand new air filtration system in a building that is falling down . in june 2024 , the prime minister who was then the leader of the opposition visited basingstoke town but not the hospital . assurances were given and reported in the basingstoke gazette that the hospital would be built by 2030 . in february after the announcement , i asked the prime minister about the logic of the delay , given that it will clearly be a significant financial burden for taxpayers while continuing to limit healthcare delivery . i was told that the hospital would be built , but not when . this is a clear step backwards . with the exception of the shadow minister , we all know the situation in which the previous government left the country , but that is not a reason for economically and medically unsound decisions now . i invite the minister — or any minister — to visit basingstoke and north hampshire hospital with me to understand the full financial and health implications of this decision for local people in north east hampshire . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . this has been an interesting and enlightening debate in some ways . of all the subjects on which the liberal democrats might have brought a motion to this house , it is fascinating that we are talking about new hospitals , as i think everybody would agree that the labour party has invested both historically and under this government in the national health service . in fact in the last budget back in the autumn , £ 13.6 billion extra was allocated to nhs capital expenditure — a record amount . i know that opposition members have not particularly enjoyed repeated references to the coalition years . i do not think anybody in this house particularly enjoys remembering the 2010 to 2015 period . the conservatives certainly do not , and apparently the liberal democrats — will the hon . gentleman give way ? i am barely getting going but would be delighted to add an extra minute to my speech . it is amazing how short memories are on the labour side of the chamber . the note from if we want the tone to be constructive , we should be constructive about the fact that labour is going to be building hospitals , when no hospitals were constructed over the last five years . the reality is very clear : hospitals do not simply appear ; we can not wish a hospital into existence . they require two things : money and time . if we wish that there were more new hospitals in this country , we should go back in time to 10 to 15 years ago . that would have been a fantastic time , when borrowing was much cheaper than it is today , to have invested in hospitals in all our communities . unfortunately , the cancellation of the building schools for the future project was basically the first act of the coalition government , and there was a lack of investment in schools and hospitals . as the shadow spokesperson will the hon . gentleman give way ? i am keen to make progress . i have repeatedly made this point to conservative members , who i do not feel are taking the advice , but i will repeat it to the liberal democrats , who i equally do not think will do so . i have a huge amount of experience in opposition — a lot of us on the government benches have a lot more experience of it than we ever wanted . if we are really serious about what this country needs , we can not just say that we want to have hospitals now and expect them to be delivered if we simultaneously oppose revenue - generating measures in the budget . i am afraid that what this motion is about , which has been revealed by many of the speeches , is opportunism . we all want more investment in the nhs and that is what this government are delivering . a great point was made by my hon . friend torbay hospital is very much a family affair for me . my wife has worked there for more years than she would let me admit in this chamber and my son is now a registrar there , so i thought i knew the hospital quite well until i was elected , and then the chief executive of torbay and south devon nhs foundation trust opened the pandora ’s box of pain and challenges that the hospital faces . that made me really angry at how the previous conservative government failed to invest in the desperate needs of our nhs , both in torbay and across the country . so it was with hope in my heart that i came to this chamber in july , hoping that over the next few months labour would be part of the solution . it is extremely sad and disappointing that torbay feels as if it has been kicked into the long grass . we know that this means that there will be a failure in serving our communities . we are expecting outstanding staff to deliver services in poor conditions , and torbay is one of the most deprived communities in the south - west , so we are letting down some of the poorest in our communities . i want to share some of the contents of this pandora ’s box with the chamber . on visiting the hospital , there is a vista of hope , as there is scaffolding around the main tower , but it is actually there to stop pieces of the tower falling on nhs workers and visitors to the hospital , rather than because repairs are under way . there are almost 700 sewage leaks across the hospital , many impacting on clinical areas . whole wards have been shut down and had deep cleans due to these sewage leaks within torbay hospital . only 6 % of the hospital is of a1 standard — that shows starkly how poor the situation is . we face immediate pressures in torbay . there are cuts to out - of - hours coronary care services that could put those in torbay and nearby constituencies such as south devon at risk of tissue death because there are not fast enough interventions for coronary conditions . i represent that neighbouring constituency , and those in the largely rural area of south devon will be severely threatened by the closure of out - of - hours coronary care in torbay because somebody decided it would be a good idea to merge it with coronary care in exeter , meaning a potential increase of up to 45 minutes in ambulance times for constituents from the south of my constituency to get to hospital . it is clearly going to put people in critical danger , and i am sure my hon . friend would agree that we desperately need the integrated care board to reconsider this poorly thought - out decision . i strongly agree with my hon . friend that this wrong - headed approach needs urgent review . in paignton , there are threats to the long - term delivery of ambulance services , which would add delays to communities getting support . perhaps the biggest threat is a financial one . down in plymouth , £ 60 million of cuts to health service budgets were announced in the last few days . in torbay , the hospital admitted that it is looking at £ 40 million of cuts to nhs services . with £ 100 million of cuts and the pressures on our services in south devon , will the minister tell us where that money has gone and how she will intervene and support our services , because our hospitals in torbay are crumbling ? in all sincerity , i thank the lib dems for bringing the debate to the house . it is fair to say that labour members are more than happy to discuss the nhs and the new hospital programme at any opportunity . i would again like to put on the record my thanks to all the staff at princess alexandra hospital in harlow . i also pay tribute to the staff of the east of england ambulance service , who go back and forth to the hospital . i often visit the princess alexandra — i actually visited it today — and i see a workforce who work incredibly hard in difficult circumstances . they are a credit to not only my town of harlow , but the nhs as a whole . as has been mentioned , the new princess alexandra hospital was one of 40 new hospitals that only existed in the mind of the former prime minister boris johnson . when i was elected , i found a project without any funding , without a business plan and without even a site to build the new hospital on . the idea that it would be built by 2030 was an absolute pipedream . the current princess alexandra site is too small . the corridors and wards are too small , the a&e department is crammed , and it is literally falling apart . we have seen sewage leaking into the wards and we saw the roof of the icu falling down . fortunately , nobody was injured . [ interruption . ] my speech is so riveting that i have woken jennie up , so i apologise for that . i support the government ’s amendment and pay tribute to the work already done by this labour government . waiting times are down , and we finally have a realistic , achievable and fully funded timetable for a new princess alexandra hospital and at least £ 1.5 billion of investment in our town . in the meanwhile , of course the princess alexandra hospital will need funding . i have met the chief exec a number of times and will meet him again next week to discuss the matter . i know that the minister is already preparing herself for the lobbying she will get from me in the tea room next week . i would like to end my speech on something that there will be consensus on across the house . does the hon . member agree that the new hospital programme is just one part of the jigsaw and that facilities such as bridlington district hospital and alfred bean hospital in driffield in my constituency are much under - utilised resources ? we should be making the most of every nhs facility by bringing community services back into those places . i thank the hon . member for his intervention . as a fellow leeds united supporter who is celebrating this week , i took his intervention just to have the opportunity to mention that . i add that harlow town were also promoted on monday . the hon . member makes a valid point , and a hospital like princess alexandra is only part of the jigsaw . just over the road , there was the walk - in centre , which was sadly closed in 2013 . ideas such as care in the community , which mean that fewer people need to go to hospital , need to be looked at . at princess alexandra hospital , one of the biggest issues is the number of people who need to go to the a&e department . we need to consider how we can avoid that and free up more medical staff to do other things , so i absolutely take his point . i will end on another area of consensus . this is an issue that members who have hospitals in their constituencies will all be aware of : nhs nurses , doctors and staff suffering abuse at work . i would like to put on the record that nhs staff are absolute heroes and that any abuse , be it physical or verbal , is totally unacceptable . i am sure that that is something we can all agree on across the house . the crisis in our nhs and the scandal of crumbling hospitals are a daily reality for my constituents and all communities served by the epsom and st helier university hospitals nhs trust . we have allowed our healthcare infrastructure to decay to a point where it hinders the delivery of care . these are not minor cosmetic issues ; many of our hospital buildings predate the nhs and are riddled with damp , mould and leaking roofs . yet we expect our dedicated doctors , nurses and support staff to deliver world - class treatment under those appalling conditions . the consequences run far deeper than peeling paint : patient safety is jeopardised , staff morale is crushed , and the basic functioning of our hospitals is compromised . staff are stretched to their limits , struggling to provide the care that our communities deserve in facilities that are simply not fit for purpose . they deal with the consequences of decades of under - investment , where patching up failing infrastructure has become the norm — a short - sighted and ultimately more costly approach . the impact of the ageing estate on elective recovery has meant that since april 2024 , more than 600 operations have had to be cancelled . the lifts break down and can not be fixed simply because they do not make the parts any more . over the past five years , over £ 60 million has been spent on improving the epsom and st helier estate just to keep it operational . at st helier , 46 % of repairs are identified as high risk . the human cost of this crumbling infrastructure is evident . patients are forced to endure unacceptable waiting times , often in undignified conditions . a&e waiting times at the epsom and st helier trust are among the worst in london , with over a third of patients waiting more than 12 hours for a bed . my hon . friend mentions corridor care . that is a recurring theme in members ’ inboxes . a constituent recently told me that her husband , who is immunosuppressed because of his chemotherapy , had to wait 54 hours in a&e at st helier with sepsis , exposing him to more infections on top of his existing conditions . does she agree that without a proper rescue package for crumbling hospitals like st helier , immunosuppressed patients will continue to be put at unnecessary risk ? i am sorry to hear that story . it is just one among a catalogue of incidents that we hear of on a regular basis . this past winter , more than 2,000 patients waited over half a day just to be seen . the delays not only cause distress and anxiety but can have serious and long - term consequences for patient outcomes . the epsom and st helier university hospitals nhs trust has worked diligently , developing detailed plans for a new specialist emergency care hospital alongside the modernisation of epsom and st helier hospitals . this state - of - the - art facility would be a beacon of hope , improving outcomes for our sickest patients and consolidating acute services in a way that strengthens staffing and keeps care local . but that promise has been left to wither . the health secretary ’s latest announcement pushes the start of construction of the new specialist emergency care hospital to 2032 at the earliest , adding to decades of false promises that have let my constituents down time and again . that is why , this friday , i will be abseiling 125 feet down st helier hospital to raise funds for the epsom and st helier hospitals charity and shine a spotlight on the urgent need for investment in our hospitals . the funds raised will provide extra support to our hospitals , over and above what the nhs can currently deliver . charity can only fill so many gaps ; it can not substitute for the government action that our hospitals desperately require . the government should reverse the delay to the new hospital programme and urgently deliver the new hospitals that patients have long been promised . they must prioritise the construction of the specialist emergency care hospital and fund the long - overdue repairs at st helier . my constituents deserve nothing less than modern , safe and high - quality healthcare . i declare an interest : my daughter is an nhs nurse . i want her , her colleagues and the patients they care for to have buildings that are safe , secure and suitable for their needs . nowhere is it more apparent that our nhs is broken than in our crumbling hospitals . my own mam recently spent two and a half months in hospital — the majority in one of our local community hospitals , which i am sure is not alone in being held together by the professionalism and care of its staff , rather than by the fabric of the building itself . lord darzi ’s report paints a stark picture of the crumbling buildings in our health service and of a primary care estate in which 20 % of the buildings predate the founding of the health service . i am very much an advocate for preserving historic buildings , but i draw the line when it comes to hospitals that are not fit for purpose . that is why we need an nhs fit for the future , which starts with buildings fit for its staff and the patients they care for . crumbling old buildings , and indeed modern buildings with inadequate staff facilities , lead to low morale and low productivity . that is why repairing , rebuilding and improving our healthcare estate is central to this government ’s plan for change and to our health mission . we are delivering that plan . it includes , as we have already heard , £ 13.6 billion in healthcare capital spending , over £ 4 billion in operational capital , and over £ 1 billion to tackle critical nhs maintenance . let us compare that with the record of the previous government : under - investment in the estate , record low public satisfaction in the nhs , record high waiting lists , doctor strikes allowed to drag on and on , and a new hospital programme years behind schedule with no money beyond march 2025 . this government are committed to rebuilding our nhs , and that is happening on the ground now in my carlisle constituency , with funding for a new £ 12 million urgent treatment centre , which was approved in december and is on track to be opened by the end of this year . that is the change that carlisle needs , it is the change our country needs , and it is the change our government are delivering . my local hospital , the queen elizabeth hospital in king ’s lynn , is one of the seven raac hospitals . i have campaigned for a new hospital since i was first elected in 2019 . the qeh has had the dubious honour of being the most propped hospital in the country . today , steel and timber supports hold up the roof to keep the hospital safe . staff and patients should not have to put up with that . initially , qeh was not part of the new hospital programme , but through campaigning in parliament and strong local support , it was added to the scheme as a priority by the last conservative government — part of a fully funded scheme that is being funded in the same way as this programme : through future spending reviews . after the election , this government ’s review of the new hospital programme cast doubt on our new hospital , but i am glad that , after pressure , raac schemes were removed from that review and restored as the priorities they should be . that was warmly welcomed by patients , staff and my constituents . the clock is ticking , however , and the government ’s decision to delay the timetable for a new hospital opening from 2030 to 2032 - 33 is unwelcome and , i would argue , unnecessary . it also means spending money propping up the roof , wasting millions of pounds that could be spent getting on with the new scheme . the trust has well - developed plans and an experienced team in place . the health secretary has said that if we can go faster than the 2027 - 28 start date for construction , he will pursue that . when i went with the minister to the hospital trust , she repeated that commitment , which i welcomed . there are concerns that the nhs england reorganisation could cause issues with approvals , but the health secretary told me in the house that we would use it to take an axe to the multi - layered approvals process . i am not sure that he has swung it yet , but i hope he does , because the savings in business cases , consultant costs , other costs and time are considerable . there has been much talk across the house of the need for action . i was at qeh last week with the chief executive . my ask is that the business case for the multi - storey car park is approved as rapidly as possible , so that work can start next year at the latest . that is the key enabling scheme to free up the existing car park so that we can get on and build the new qeh . the recent confirmation of the available funding was welcome and i thank the minister — it will be a major investment in my constituency . let us now get on with the new qeh that the staff , patients and the community it serves across norfolk , cambridgeshire and lincolnshire deserve . for years , my constituents in banbury have lived with the consequences of a health system that has been allowed to fall apart bit by bit , service by service . our mental health services , especially for children and adolescents , are severely under - resourced . families are waiting far too long for help , even in the most serious cases . our maternity unit in banbury was downgraded under the conservatives , so those having complex or emergency births have to travel to oxford or warwick , with all the risk that that brings , especially when delays are caused by our inadequate transport infrastructure . there is no overnight surgery or day - care surgery available locally , and patients fall through the cracks because of poorly co - ordinated services between oxfordshire , warwickshire and northamptonshire . under the conservatives , and with the support of the liberal democrats in coalition , money was diverted away from vital health services into a disastrous and unnecessary reorganisation of our national health service . the result is what we are seeing now : fragmented care , overstretched services and communities like banbury being left behind . my constituents are not going to be pleased by governments making promises that they can not keep and when they have no realistic plan or funds to deliver them . multiple government members have made that point , but surely they can see that promising to build a hospital in a decade ’s time when they may not be in power is a meaningless promise . i suggest that our decade of national renewal will ensure that the hospitals that we have promised will be delivered . i am confident about that because things are changing . the new hospital programme has been put back on a firm footing , with every project backed by real funding and a realistic plan , which is equally important . crucially , this government are not stopping there . labour ’s 10 - year health plan is about improving how the whole system works with patients . that means better co - ordination between gps , hospitals , mental health services and social care , and ensuring that wherever people live , even if that is on the border between counties , which is an issue close to the hearts of people in my constituents , they are not passed from one part of the system to another without support . it also means doing more locally , with more care available close to home , so fewer people have to travel longer distances to get basic treatment , and earlier invention , so that problems are picked up before they become emergencies . we have already seen progress . we have cut waiting lists by over 200,000 , delivered over 3 million extra appointments , recruited more gps and invested £ 26 million in mental health crisis centres to alleviate the pressures on a&e services . some £ 2 billion will be spent on technology and digital improvements to increase productivity and ensure patients are seen faster . we are starting to turn things around and doing so in a way that puts patients first , without making undeliverable , unrealistic promises that damage trust in politics and the power of politics under our democratic system . for too long , people in banbury have been left wondering if their nhs would be there when they needed it . after 14 years , they can see that help is finally on the way . with this labour government , things are changing practically and with purpose . i start by declaring an interest that will prejudice me in this debate : i was born in eastbourne district general hospital ; i have said farewell to cherished folks there ; and i have been brought back from the brink in the dgh myself . i express huge thanks to the incredible staff in a&e , the resuscitation area , the acute medical unit and on jevington ward who treated me and got me back into action last year . however , for years , our dgh services have been eroded , with core services like consultant - led maternity moved to the conquest hospital in hastings , an unacceptable 20 miles away . i will keep fighting for the return of consultant - led maternity services at the dgh , just as i fought alongside local campaigners to reopen our midwifery unit for births after months of closure . i fight standing on the shoulders of local campaigning giants for our nhs , such as liz walke . i have known her since i was seven , and i am proud to welcome her to the gallery today alongside rose bunn . beyond services , our dgh buildings are crying out for help . our dgh bosses have said : “ the age and standard of current hospital buildings presents challenges for the consistent delivery of safe , effective , responsive and efficient care . ” the trust ’s backlog maintenance bill stands at £ 460 million . that is one of the largest in the country , and it is why we were included in the new hospital programme in the first place . our town was therefore appalled that the conservatives put our hospital to the back of the queue when they were in office , and eastbournians are further outraged that this government are keeping us there in wave 4 . in fact , having been born in that hospital 31 years ago , i will be nearly 50 by the time it is set to be completed . in the light of the mismatch between the size of our maintenance backlog and our place in the queue , my key ask of the minister is whether the government will review our wave 4 position in the programme as it stands . if they will not , what extra support will the government provide to address the growing , nearly £ 500 million maintenance bill across our trust ? eastbourne needs answers and deserves action , and eastbourne , together with campaigners such as liz , will be listening very closely to her answers . i draw attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i welcome this opposition day debate on hospitals and the state of the nhs , which is on its knees after 14 years of mismanagement by the previous government , but i find myself blinking in the dappled light of a new reality . reading the motion as drafted , one could be forgiven for thinking that an unchallenged tory government over the last 14 years alone were responsible for the chaos that we witness but , pinching myself to wake from the dream , i recall that the liberal democrats were part of that government for five long years . they may want to forget about it , but we remember it . we remember the rose garden , where the blue tories and the yellow tories harmoniously , hand in hand , drew up their plans to devastate our health and social care public services through the austerity programme . we remember the bedroom tax , which was voted for multiple times by the liberal democrats . we remember the lansley reforms and the liberal democrat spokespeople squirming in television interviews as they tried to justify the chaos into which they were about to plunge the nhs . under the previous labour government , we had the highest satisfaction levels and lowest waiting times , but what we inherited in july last year was an unmitigated disaster . the tory - lib dem coalition tore up the last labour government ’s plans for a new hospital in my constituency as part of the austerity programme . the staff at that hospital do a remarkable job , and i put on record my gratitude to them , even when i was wandering around dressed as a giant bunny rabbit on sunday . the tories and the liberal democrats — nobody else — are responsible for the 14 - year delay in getting a new hospital in watford . if they had not done what they did , we would have had a new hospital by now , but we do not . not a brick has been laid . they should hang their heads in shame at this total betrayal of watford ’s residents . the new hospital programme was not funded beyond march , and as the prime minister said in response to my question to him a few weeks ago , the hospitals existed only in the imagination of boris johnson . i welcome this motion recognising the devastating state of the nhs , but let us be acutely aware that responsibility for that lies with the liberal democrats , who table this motion , and with the conservatives in the previous government . it is all very well to want to magic a hospital out of thin air , but it will be this labour government who finance and deliver it . picturing the hon . member in a rabbit outfit has woken us all up . i will focus my speech specifically on hinchingbrooke hospital , and highlight some key issues that will impact delivery of our new hospital in huntingdon . during the general election campaign , i pledged to fight for the resources to rebuild hinchingbrooke , and i will continue to push this labour government to ensure that they follow through on the programme they committed to deliver . in may 2023 , the then health secretary , my right hon . friend while i welcome the fact that hinchingbrooke is rightly in wave 1 of the programme , we need clarity on the timeframe . although this government are aware of the raac issues , they have still not given a detailed timeframe as to when we will get our hospital built ; there is a vague start date , but no completion date . crucially , in september 2024 , the minister for secondary care confirmed in a written answer to me that the detailed structural assessment of hinchingbrooke hospital in 2022 “ estimated that the remaining life of the raac panels ” extended to “ approximately 2030 ” , even after “ the installation of fail - safe steelwork . ” in february , she stated that this summer , the government will publish a report “ assessing the clinical and operational impacts of the running of the existing hospital beyond the estimated life of the current hospital site ” . with the delays already caused by road access and grid access , and the lack of clarity about a start date or a completion date , what assurances can the minister give that my constituents will not find themselves in a condemned hospital building after 2030 , with the dhsc simply owning the risk that it will collapse ? if the new hospital is to be completed by 2030 , we need plans , action , and focus on making sure that any changes are usable , safe and fit for purpose , with no more delays . in short , the following issues must be addressed in order for hinchingbrooke to be delivered : the programme business case for the nhp must receive ministerial approval ; a hospital 2.0 - compliant design must be approved and delivered ; a capital envelope of at least £ 900 million and a realistic contingency must be allocated ; and mobilisation of the programme must be quick . it is clear that the 2030 target might now be unreachable , but mobilisation by spring 2026 seems realistic , and i will push the government and all stakeholders to work towards that target . there also needs to be further work between hinchingbrooke and the nhp to develop a strategic outline case , and it is crucial that that case is then approved as soon as possible in order to complete the new hospital by as close to 2030 as possible . we also need grid access that is fit for purpose , as the current grid access will not be sufficient for hinchingbrooke . currently , the gap between sufficient grid space being approved and meeting that which is required will be a year — that is clearly not appropriate . there are issues regarding a vital new access road to alleviate traffic . those issues are caused by land owned jointly by cambridgeshire constabulary and national highways . the government must get all stakeholders around the table to reach a solution , given that they are public bodies . to conclude , i reaffirm that i will do all i can to work with the government , the nhs and others to make sure that my constituents get the new hospital they so desperately need . the very first thing i did when i came to this place was write to the secretary of state for health and social care — along with my constituency neighbour , my hon . friend that sounds abstract — that amount of money is difficult to get your head around — so what does it mean to staff and patients ? it means that my constituents write to me about having experienced major health issues , like cardiac arrest , and having been forced to wait in overcrowded areas without seating because there is not the space available . it means hospital corridors flooding and medics having to wade through the water to get to their patients . on one occasion , it means a constituent writing to me about what should have been the utter delight of having a baby delivered safely into the world — but 30 minutes before the baby arrived , the light fitting in the delivery suite fell down in the middle of active labour . stepping hill sees about half a million patients each year . when i ask my constituents about their experiences of stepping hill , many tell me that they are worried about the buildings , but so many of them praise the phenomenal staff . i will share a few of those remarks with the house . chris said that the staff could not have been kinder or more efficient . alan said : “ all staff at stepping hill , from top to bottom , were absolutely brilliant ” . brenda said that the staff remained dedicated despite the state of the buildings . amanda said , “ without stepping hill and the wonderful doctors and nurses there , my son would not be here today ” , and sheila said : “ staff were run ragged but were amazing . ” the previous government failed to provide the funding that stepping hill needs , and despite the huge repairs bill , it was left out of the new hospital programme . the legacy of that decision and of the failed conservative government hangs over my constituents , who deserve better . that government broke their promise to my constituents , and i will continue to work with this and any future government to get stepping hill what it needs . in part , that involves a new site in stockport town centre . i am working closely with stockport council and the trust to push for that . it could act as a diagnostic centre and an out - patient centre , and it is surely part of a strong , long - term solution to ensure that patient needs are met and my constituents get what they need . the health of our nation is directly linked to the wealth of our nation and my constituents , whether patients or staff , are looking for the government to have their back , to fund the repairs in stepping hill and to deliver the new additional site in the town centre . i am going to change the tone of the debate a little bit from when labour came into office , it promised to end sticking - plaster politics , but that seems to be exactly what it is offering to torbay hospital : a small sticking plaster to hold together a gaping wound . torbay hospital serves a critical role for my largely rural constituency of south devon and faces immense pressure every single day . nearly all of the hospital estate is currently unfit for purpose , yet under the government ’s timeline , construction on a rebuild is not due to begin until 2032 . that means seven more years of staff working in outdated , inadequate conditions and patients receiving care in a facility that no longer meets the basic standards expected of a modern health service . the case for urgent and sustained investment could not be clearer . the total cost of eradicating the maintenance backlog at torbay hospital now stands at £ 53.6 million — small beer compared with some colleagues ’ constituencies . of that , £ 4.6 million is needed to address high - risk issues , which are those , in the nhs ’s own terms , that pose a direct threat to the safety of patients or the day - to - day functioning of the hospital . nearly £ 1 in every £ 10 needed for repairs is to fix problems that are considered an urgent threat to health and safety . that is simply unacceptable in any modern healthcare system . last year , the ear , nose and throat department was forced to cancel a full week of out - patient care after a sewage leak . the main tower of the hospital is literally being held together by scaffolding , which costs £ 1 million a week . operating theatres lack adequate temperature control , and the pathology department , which plays a critical role in cancer diagnosis and other urgent care , is operating out of a rotting portacabin with holes in the walls . that temporary accommodation has been in place for more than 40 years . this hospital is operating at 98 % capacity — far above safe levels . it is running at full tilt every day under conditions that make effective , safe care more and more difficult to provide . i have to give a huge shout - out to the incredible staff at torbay hospital who keep that place going . the situation is not sustainable and nor should it be acceptable . the current government ’s decision to delay urgent repairs is not just a poor decision , but a false economy . we are spending so much money shoring up a hospital , when fixing it would cost less than holding it together with scaffolding . keeping hospitals such as torbay going with temporary fixes and emergency maintenance is far more expensive in the long term than investing in the proper infrastructure now . we need the government to find innovative ways to finance critical repairs . patients and staff in torbay and across the country deserve better than another decade of waiting . i am proud to declare my interest as a governor of the royal berkshire hospital . the royal berks is an incredibly important place for me . i have been treated there many times , friends and family work there , and my constituents rely on the dedication of its hard - working staff . the way that this important community asset was treated by the previous conservative government is a scandal . they have left a record of broken promises and a building that in many places is literally crumbling . looking at the conservative legacy , before the 2024 general election , they introduced a seven - year delay to the construction of the new hospital in 2023 . that is a seven - year delay for something that was never funded in the first place . the conservatives ’ dithering and delays have resulted in £ 7 million being wasted at the royal berkshire hospital on surveys , investigations and the development of a hospital programme that was never going to go anywhere , and the conservatives knew that all the time . their behaviour over the last five years has been shameful , and they have deceived my constituents . my hon . friend i call danny chambers to wind up the debate for the liberal democrats . it seems that members on both sides of the house have been experiencing similar problems in the hospitals that they represent . years of under - investment has left many hospitals with leaking roofs , for instance . my hon . friend like many other members , i regularly meet hospital leaders and managers — in my case , at our local hospital in winchester — to discuss the problems that they are experiencing . despite the heroic efforts of the staff at the royal hampshire county hospital , they are facing a set of issues similar to those that have been raised time and again this afternoon , including , again , leaking roofs over treatment areas . like the hospital mentioned by my hon . friend my hon . friend has mentioned faulty buildings and roofs . in musgrove park hospital in taunton , staff are fainting in temperatures of 30 ° c in temporary buildings where there is no cooling machinery , while mums are trying to give birth in the same ward . that is completely unacceptable . we need interim funding if the hospital — which was mentioned earlier today by my right hon . friend it is indeed unacceptable , in respect of patients ’ safety but also health and safety at work , because the health of the staff is being put at risk as well . these are not minor inconveniences ; they are daily threats to patients ’ care and they cost us dear , so why are we not fixing them ? failure on the part of the last government is no excuse for continued delay , and saying “ we can not afford it ” when the cost of inaction is higher is simply nonsensical . the longer we wait , the more it will cost the taxpayer . much has been said about trust in politics , and we will not forget what happened in our part of hampshire when conservatives stood on election manifestos promising to deliver a new hospital for which they never had any funds . there was no funding secured and no shovel - ready plan , but they campaigned on the issue repeatedly , hoping that the voters would not find out until it was too late . other members have pointed out that gp surgeries are being particularly neglected . the budget allocated funds to cover additional upgrades for just 200 gp surgeries out of a total of 6,000 . with the government ’s jobs tax hitting gps , it is becoming harder for those practices to fund their own improvements . however , i was pleased that we really welcome the minister ’s warm words on social care . we had a social care roundtable just yesterday , and we heard that every pound spent on social care saves the nhs £ 3 . we urge the government to hold cross - party talks as soon as possible , because for every year that we delay getting a plan for social care , people are languishing in hospitals on delayed discharge which is costing us a huge amount of money . we have to end the vicious cycle of false economies and fortunes being spent on papering over the cracks . the total repair backlogs at the delayed new hospital sites could reach an estimated £ 5.7 billion by the time construction starts . are the government really of the view that keeping hospitals on life support is a good use of taxpayers ’ money ? repairing and replacing crumbling nhs buildings is not just about treating more patients ; it is about reviving and boosting our economy . here is the truth : we will not grow our economy unless we reinvest in the services that support it . let us change course . we urge the government to reverse the long delays in the new hospital programme , because many will not be open until the 2040s on the current timeline , and those hospitals have to be kept functioning until then ; to set out a 10 - year investment plan to fix hospitals and gp surgeries ; to urgently release funds that have already been committed , to start construction straightaway ; and to publish a plan to recruit and retain a skilled workforce to carry out the work efficiently . that is what investing to save looks like . it means improving care , lowering long - term costs and building a stronger , healthier economy . the conservatives chose to cut investment , which led to higher costs . our plan is to increase investment now so that we can lower costs in the future . we urge the government not simply to patch over the damage done to our nhs . as the liberal politician william beveridge , who was a visionary behind the formation of the nhs , said : “ a revolutionary moment … is a time for revolutions , not for patching . ” let us be bold , and let us invest now . it will be better for the taxpayer , it will be better for patients , and it will boost our economy . it really is a pleasure to close this debate on behalf of the government . i think there have been 33 contributions from hon . members from across the house . nowhere is it more apparent that the nhs is broken than in our crumbling hospitals . over 14 years , the nhs was starved of capital and the capital budget was repeatedly raided to plug the holes in day - to - day spending . lord darzi ’s investigation into the nhs in england made it clear that we have crumbling buildings and it , mental health patients sharing showers in victorian - era cells infested with vermin , and parts of the nhs operating in decrepit portacabins . some 20 % of the primary care estate predates the founding of the health service in 1948 . i thank the liberal democrats for bringing forward this debate . we broadly agree on the disgrace that the backlog of repairs , the decades - long cannibalisation of capital budgets and the unfunded fantasy of the new hospital programme had become . where we disagree is on the cause and the solution . as we have heard today , the liberal democrats are completely silent on the part they played as members of the coalition government . they were active and enthusiastic partners in the decision to impose austerity , and our nhs was starved of funding on their watch . the practice of raiding capital budgets to keep things afloat started in 2014 , on their watch . the disastrous top - down nhs reorganisation , which wasted billions of pounds and contributed to record - high waiting lists , happened on their watch . as for the solution , the liberal democrats are silent on how they would pay for and accelerate the new hospital programme . they are playing the same cynical game that we saw from the conservative party : they are dangling the prospect of a new hospital while being unable to explain where the funding would come from or how the construction industry could deliver it within the timeframe . it is indeed opportunism , as my hon . friend i have met many hon . members in person and heard them in the chamber today , and i know others are not here who would have wanted to contribute . as the minister , let me say plainly that i agree with everyone ’s anger . i share that anger because , when i tour hospitals up and down the country — i did so recently in doncaster and in oxfordshire , where i visited the warneford hospital — i often see equipment and infrastructure that was procured 20 years ago when i was working for the nhs in bristol . seeing these physical reminders of the past when i tour hospitals fills me with a mixture of pride and shame . i feel pride because i was part of a generation of leaders who delivered hospitals fit for patients in the biggest hospital programme in nhs history delivered under the last labour government , and i feel shame because our legacy was squandered and patients have paid the price . we understand the legacy , and lord darzi was very clear that the task for us is to take action . that is why the chancellor took the necessary decisions in her budget to meet this challenge , and why we have put the programme on a firm financial footing . as my hon . friend the minister for care said , we are not just writing the wrong ; we are taking pressures off hospitals , shifting the focus of our nhs from hospital to community , recruiting over 1,500 more gps to take the pressure off a&e and harnessing the power of ai to help people who depend on care to stay at home . that point was well made by my hon . friends the members for stroud ( dr opher ) , for aylesbury ( laura kyrke - smith ) , for milton keynes central ( emily darlington ) and for calder valley ( josh fenton - glynn ) . as he made me sponsor him , may i wish my hon . friend the member for calder valley good luck in the marathon this weekend ? the challenge before us is immense , but every member of this government is up for the fight . members made a number of points , and i will try to get through them in the time available . i could not agree more with those who made the point that we have to break out of the vicious cycle of false economy . this government were elected on a manifesto to end short - termism , easy answers and sticking - plaster politics . when we came into government we were saddled with a bill of almost £ 14 billion in backlog maintenance . my right hon . friend the chancellor has given us the funding this year to back nhs systems with over £ 4 billion of operational capital . a lifesaving cash injection of £ 750 million for targeted estate safety funding is a vital first step towards fixing our crumbling estate . that is crucial not only for patients , but for staff morale , as my hon . friend furthermore , i assure members that , unlike the previous government , we will never raid capital budgets to plug day - to - day spending , and the treasury has updated its fiscal rules to make that impossible . my hon . friend members have called on the government to reverse course and commit to a timeline that is unfunded , unrealistic and undeliverable . that has been recognised by a national audit office report , which stated that “ some schemes publicly promised in 2020 now face substantial delays and will not be completed by 2030 … with implications for patients and clinicians . ” the delivery of these hospitals existed only as a figment of boris johnson ’s imagination and this government are doing the hard yards of putting the new hospital programme back on track . the nhp previously received a red rating from the infrastructure and projects authority , now known as the national infrastructure and service transformation authority . its latest review , which it carried out in january , rated the nhp as amber . that reflects the measures that we took to put the programme on a firm footing , as my hon . friend some members , including the chair of the select committee , i briefly say to my hon . friend we are taking a systematic approach to building the next generation of hospitals , known as hospital 2.0 , allowing trusts to benefit from economies of scale , provide excellent patient care and facilities , and ensure that staff are supported with technology for decent working environments . it contributes to our growth mission , putting more money in people ’s pockets and supporting our supply chains . in response to my hon . friend i know the clock is against me but i want to end by saying that i completely understand why colleagues are so concerned about the plans , when previous governments have so badly let them and their constituents down . i also hear the point made by staff and patients deserve better , so i want to offer them some reassurance about our record since july . we promised to sit down with resident doctors and end the damaging strike action — promise made , promise kept . in october , we said we would recruit more gps by april and we recruited more than we said — promise made , promise kept . we promised 2 million extra appointments in our manifesto and we smashed that target seven months early — promise made , promise kept . last month , over 80 % of patients in england referred for cancer had it ruled out or diagnosed within 28 days , the first time that target has been met for years , and waiting lists are now consistently falling . we have gripped this critical issue since july , from day one with the review . the secretary of state and i met mps and the nhp team before the completion of the review . i met all colleagues the day after the announcement in january and i have had individual meetings . i will keep my promises to visit , when the diary allows . i am really looking forward to north devon . i am also visiting hillingdon , where i grew up , with my hon . friend finally , question put ( the house divided : ayes 77 , noes 307 . question accordingly negatived . question put forthwith ( question agreed to . the deputy speaker declared the main question , as amended , to be agreed to ( resolved , that this house regrets the appalling state of repair of nhs hospitals across the country ; notes that the nhs maintenance backlog rose to £ 13.8 billion in 2023 - 24 ; further notes the sustained pattern of cannibalising nhs capital budgets to keep day - to - day services running ; condemns the previous government ’s record of starved repair budgets and exploding maintenance backlogs , which made sewage leaks , cracked walls , crumbling ceilings and sinking floors commonplace ; further condemns the previous government for launching the new hospitals programme with no realistic plan to fund or deliver it ; also notes that the chancellor has announced new fiscal rules to ensure capital budgets can no longer be cannibalised , with transfers from capital to resource budgets not permitted ; recognises that the previous government left a new hospital programme which was unfunded , unrealistic and undeliverable ; welcomes that the government has taken action to review that programme and has published the new hospital programme plan for implementation , to put the programme on a sustainable footing ; supports the government ’s investment in the plan , which will increase to up to £ 15 billion over each consecutive five - year wave , averaging around £ 3 billion a year from 2030 ; and further supports the work being done to bring forward construction of the reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete replacement schemes wherever possible , to ensure that patient and staff safety is prioritised . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker , could you advise me whether it is in order that the point of order is most definitely on the record . it is a point of courtesy to be here for the close of a debate if you are here for the opening . no doubt , opposition front benchers will make that very clear to the member . i inform the house that the speaker has selected amendment ( a ) tabled in the name of the prime minister . i beg to move , that this house regrets the persistent scandal of raw sewage being dumped by water companies into rivers , lakes and coastal areas ; notes with deep concern that just 14 % of rivers and lakes in england are in good ecological health ; condemns the previous government for letting water company bosses get away with the scandal while paying themselves millions of pounds in bonuses ; further notes the potential benefits of blue flag status in improving responsibility and accountability from water companies , through compliance checks and stringent environmental standards ; and calls on the government to take urgent action to end the sewage scandal , including the introduction of a new blue flag status for rivers and chalk streams , to give them greater protection against sewage dumping and ensure the public knows when rivers are clean and safe . it is an honour to open this debate . for me , serving the people of westmoreland also means defending its natural beauty and purity , which are important to our national heritage , farming industry and tourism and hospitality economy . our proposal aims to highlight the scandal of the pollution of our waterways and calls for practical solutions that will make a difference . the government ’s recent water ( special measures ) act 2025 was a step in the right direction after the failure of the last conservative government to take meaningful action , yet it was surely also a missed opportunity to bring in the radical transformation of regulation and ownership that is essential if we are to clean up our waterways and clean up the water industry as a whole . sir jon cunliffe ’s review gives us hope that a second , more ambitious water bill might be coming , but there is no guarantee of that , so our job as the constructive opposition in this place is to hold the government to account and urge them to make the big changes that britain voted for last july . the need for radical action was made all the more clear recently when the figures for sewage spills in 2024 were released . those figures were horrific : a 106 % increase in the duration of spills in our lakes , rivers and seas in just two short years . over easter in torbay , we had five sewage spills according to the surfers against sewage app . does my hon . friend agree that it is extremely disappointing to say the least that , rather than colleagues just getting their cossie and towel to go swimming at their favourite swimming spot , they must now also check the sewage leak app ? it is outrageous . i agree with my hon . friend , who makes a really good point about his own communities . that is what we are trying to address today by bringing practical solutions to prevent this outrage . that 106 % increase in the duration of sewage spills in just two years has been explained away on the record by water industry bosses as the consequence of climate change , because it rains more than it used to . yes , that is absolutely true , but it did not rain 106 % more in 2024 than it did in 2022 — not even in the lake district . the reality is that the failure of water companies to invest in their infrastructure and the failure of ofwat to force them to do so mean that the scandal is set to continue despite the government ’s new legislation . there were 754 spills in my constituency last year alone . we do not want to see those numbers anywhere , but in a constituency that does not have a major waterway , that is absurdly high . does my hon . friend agree that if we want to start genuinely holding these water companies to account , a great place to start would be replacing ofwat ? my hon . friend anticipates where i am going next , but yes , it takes some doing to have such figures in a constituency lacking in water — certainly lacking in it compared to my neck of the woods . i confess that i am doing this job not just because my right hon . friend the catchment of the river eden going through appleby , kirkby stephen and many beautiful villages saw over 7,000 hours of spills on 705 occasions . the river kent catchment saw 5,300 hours of spills on 455 occasions . windermere alone had 38 spills over 123 hours . the “ constructive opposition ” spokesperson — i do not know what that makes the conservatives — is making a powerful speech . i look forward to having an opportunity to visit his constituency , because it sounds beautiful . does he agree that it is disgraceful that while this sewage is being leaked , the chief executive officers of water companies are still paying themselves exorbitant bonuses ? the hon . member would , of course , be enormously welcome to visit the lakes and the dales . he makes a key point , which i will seek to address , about the injustice of people being paid huge bonuses for failure at the top of these organisations . that is also money leaving the system and the industry that could have been invested in putting some of this right . i have talked about my patch , but colleagues across the house , from every party and from every corner of the united kingdom , will have seen the data for their communities too , and they should rightly be outraged . rose — i am sure my hon . friend is outraged . my hon . friend talks , quite correctly , about a beautiful part of england . i , too , represent a very beautiful part of the world . here is an unbelievable fact for him — i have written it on my hand : in 2023 , there were no fewer than 1,439 sewage spills in the highlands . what a disgrace that none of the scottish nationalists , the governing party of scotland , are here today . my hon . friend makes an important observation from a constituency vast and rural — my constituency is the second largest in england , but it is bijou and compact compared with his . he makes a good point about the administration in scotland . as talking about dividends , does the hon . gentleman agree that it is completely wrong that tens of millions , if not hundreds of millions , also leak out on high interest on the internal shareholder loans of those who own the water companies ? i will talk later about why privatisation of the water industry was such a colossal mistake , and that is one of the consequences — a predictable consequence . the hon . gentleman makes a very good point . recent research by surfers against sewage covers all the water companies , but i am bound to pick out united utilities as an example . united utilities paid out £ 320 million to investors last year , while its customers — my constituents — will pay 32 % more in bills . by the way , 11 % of every one of my constituents ’ water bills is going to service that company ’s debts — debts racked up in part by borrowing money in order to give huge , undeserved paydays to their investors . in south devon last year , we had an astonishing 49,904 hours of sewage leaks , or 5.69 years - worth of sewage pouring into the glorious dart and avon and into the sea around south devon . meanwhile , my constituents write to me about bills that have gone up by as much as 50 % . does my hon . friend agree that it is an outrage that the privatised water companies are able to carry on increasing bills , increasing dividends to shareholders and paying multimillion - pound salaries to ceos while this obscenity of sewage pouring into our rivers , seas and lakes continues ? my hon . friend represents an utterly beautiful part of the country and she fights for it admirably ; her constituents are lucky to have her . she makes an important point . i mentioned that 11 % of the bills paid by my constituents in the north - west of england goes to service united utilities ’ debt , but that is one of the lowest levels . for many other colleagues on both sides of the house , their local water companies will be using up to 30 % of the bills charged just to service their debt . the sewage scandal is an environmental scandal , but it is also a financial one — an affront to justice and fairness , as well as to our ecology . it is also a health scandal . what water companies are doing by allowing sewage to seep into our coastal waters and rivers means that many people who enjoy that environment for swimming and so on fall ill , and many of them lose days at work . as well as covering the cost to the taxpayer of cleaning up the environment , the water companies should really be making a contribution to the exchequer to cover sick pay and the costs to the nhs . my hon . friend makes an important point on behalf of his coastal and island communities in the far south - west . they are also very lucky to have him speaking up for them . the windrush against sewage pollution and save windermere campaigns worked together on a recent report showing that the use of funds for capital projects by water companies around the country was at best wasteful and negligent and at worst , dare i say it , deeply suspect . they focused on the proposal by , again , united utilities to spend almost £ 13 million of local bill payers ’ money on an extension to a sewage outfall pipe into windermere . wasp found this to be “ excessive ” and said it seemed unreasonable that 43 three - bedroom houses could be built for the price of putting a mere 150 - metre sewage pipe into a lake . the report shines a light on what wasp considers to be inflated capital spending costs at water companies around the country , and it rightly asks what ofwat is doing by signing this stuff off — signing off huge bill increases when water companies are not spending that money wisely . my hon . friend has outlined the outrage and the scandal of sewage leaking into our rivers , lakes and seas . it is also the case that sewage is spilling out on to our streets , and groundwater infiltration causes much of the problem . thames water in my area has so far refused to do anything about “ poo corner ” in the parish of berrick salome . does my hon . friend agree that this is another issue we need to address ? until now , i always thought “ the house at pooh corner ” was a good thing ; obviously that would not be so in this case . i have seen the same thing in my own patch . in the village of burneside we are finally , after 20 years of campaigning , getting some additional new sewage infrastructure , which will hopefully prevent poop literally coming up on to the pavements in light rainfall where the local kids catch the bus to go into kendal to school , which is an absolute outrage . my hon . friend is right to campaign , as he does very well , for his communities on this issue . we should already know not to take water companies at their word , i am afraid , given their shoddy record on data transparency . for example , the chief executive of united utilities , louise beardmore , among others admitted at the environment , food and rural affairs committee not very long ago that they had refused to release spill data until wasp appealed to the information commissioner . furthermore , in 2022 united utilities was listed as the best performing water company in england , for which it was allowed to raise its bills as a reward . however , the bbc reported whistleblowers at the environment agency claiming that united utilities had been wrongly downgrading dozens of pollution incidents . so we can surely be forgiven for being a little cynical when those water companies propose huge sums for projects like the one i have just mentioned . that is why our key criticism of the government ’s new water act is not of anything that is in that legislation , but of what is missing from it . the situation whereby water companies can be responsible for record levels of sewage pollution and be shown to make bad use of bill payers ’ money , with inflated capital costs and inflated dividends , could not happen if they were regulated properly , but they are not . in my constituency in march , phosphate levels in the river mole surged by 50 % and nitrates doubled . this is pollution that can cause algal blooms and suffocate wildlife . does my hon . friend agree that we urgently need a clean water authority with real enforcement powers to protect our rivers , before it is simply too late ? i completely agree , and my hon . friend is absolutely right to make that point , particularly given the experience she has in her constituency . she rightly fights very forcefully for her communities and to clean up her waterways . she will have seen , like all of us , that the principal problem is a failure of regulation . there has to be an answer to that and the liberal democrat proposal , which i will come to in a moment , would certainly make it more likely that this would be dealt with effectively — and if it solved the problem , that would be great . the water industry regulatory framework is fragmented and weak . the regulators lack the resource , the power and the culture , it would appear , to make a serious difference . that is why the liberal democrats propose a new clean water authority so that water companies stop running rings around multiple regulators and begin to act in the interests of the british people and of the waterways that we love . i represent a very beautiful part of the yorkshire dales , in wharfedale , and yorkshire water has been responsible for hundreds of thousands of hours of sewage spills into the rivers . it was fined £ 47 million by ofwat for its poor performance in 2023 , only for that to be repeated in 2024 . will the hon . gentleman welcome the action that the government have already taken through the water ( special measures ) act 2025 — which is more than the previous government ever did to tackle this disgusting problem — and also recognise that we do see the problems with regulation and the fact that we need stronger regulation of the water industry to protect the environment and public health , and that is the role of the cunliffe review ? i absolutely welcome the act , as i said at the beginning of the debate . it is a step in the right direction ; i just do not think that it is enough , and the hon . lady makes the case as to why it is not enough . her water company , yorkshire water , is one of four water companies that between them owe ofwat £ 164 million in fines because of their failure , and ofwat has so far claimed zero — none of that . there seems to be an awareness among water companies that ofwat is not a regulator to be feared and therefore not one to be responded to . that is among the reasons why we need a new , much more powerful regulator that has the power , and uses it , to refuse to sign off on spending plans that prioritise the investor over the consumer and the environment . i thank the hon . gentleman and his party for bringing the motion . it is important that we improve the quality of our rivers and seas . does he share my concern that in the water ( special measures ) act the government refused to allow local areas to retain the money fined from water companies to improve the environment in that area ? were they able to do that , that would lead to a real improvement in the quality of our environment . i agree , and the hon . member can check the record and see us voting with the conservatives in committee . he makes a good point : the communities most damaged by pollution should be the ones that receive investment from the fines — if , indeed , ofwat ever bothers to collect them . alongside the need for regulatory reform , we propose a radical transformation of the ownership model . privatisation of the water industry has been an expensive failure—35 years of huge debts and payouts to investors , 35 years of inadequate investment in our infrastructure . the conservative promise of britain becoming a shareowning democracy has turned into the predictable nightmare reality of british public utilities owned by billionaires and foreign powers — what an absolute disgrace . the end result is the rivers , lakes and seas in which we swim , fish , canoe , sail , work and play polluted by an industry now owned by those who took but would not give . water companies need new models of ownership , transitioning to public benefit companies that are focused on environmental good , not profiteering , with funds from customers ’ bills pumped back into upgrading and repairing infrastructure , not draining away in dividends . we welcome the independent water commission chaired by sir jon cunliffe , though we remain impatient given the time it will take to publish the commission ’s findings , the further period of time it may take for the government to do anything about them , followed by a legislative process and implementation period — we will be at the end of the parliament before we know it . to be fair , with the commission the government provide themselves with a second chance to bring in the ambitious changes that are needed , and we urge them not to miss this chance . ministers will remember with deep joy the 44 amendments that the liberal democrats proposed to the water bill . in our submission to sir jon , i have sought to turn those amendments into a single set of proposals to restore our water industry to environmental and financial health , and to harness the amazing power of citizen scientists and volunteers up and down the country . it is why we called for the inclusion of water campaigners , such as wasp , save windermere , the clean river kent campaign , eden rivers trust and south cumbria rivers trust , on water company boards . it is why we call for the government ’s welcome new sewage spills database to be a searchable tool , including retrospectively , so that we do not hamstring those brilliant volunteers who seek to hold the water industry and its regulators to account . tens of thousands of people are giving their expertise , time and passion to clean up our waterways . let us let them off the leash , equip them and empower them . i was sad to see conservative and labour colleagues refuse to support these measures during the passage of the water ( special measures ) act , but i hope that they will have a change of heart today . in the motion before us , we specifically urge the establishment of a new system of blue flag status for rivers and chalk streams as a practical way to force water companies to be more accountable for the safety of the swimmers who use them and for the ongoing protection and flourishing of precious habitats and ecosystems . rose — i will give way first to the hon . gentleman — and then to several others . voting for the recent water ( special measures ) act and serving in committee with the hon . gentleman was one of the highlights of my first six months in this place . [ hon . members : “ aw . ” ] for constituents in my coastal community , it is so important that we get this right , so it is right that we take a long - term transformative approach . does he agree that it is not just the safety of residents and tourists that will benefit from the government ’s changes to clean up our water , but the selfless volunteers from organisations such as the rnli in places like weston - super - mare , who deserve to do their vital lifesaving work in the cleanest and safest water possible ? i completely agree — and the feeling is mutual . i appreciate that i am going on a bit and that a few members wish to intervene . we will have to go by hands up . [ interruption . ] my hon . friend is making a typically good speech . does he agree that water from areas where one can not swim still ends up in areas where one can ? the roden and perry rivers in my constituency suffered over 2,000 hours of sewage spills in the past year — the perry is affected by a spill into the common brook near oswestry . not only does that water go past farmers ’ fields , but it ends up in shrewsbury , where there is a designated swimming area . i want to swim in it . does he agree that the blue flag status would clear up the whole catchment , not just the places where people go swimming ? order . before you get back to your feet , mr farron , i remind you that you can speak as long as you want , but the longer you speak , the less likely it is that colleagues will be able to contribute . i appreciate your guidance , madam deputy speaker , and i will allow maybe only two more interventions . i am coming towards the end of my remarks . i am trying to be not selfish but generous by getting the balance right . i do not want to squeeze people out altogether . rose — i give my hon . friend one of the last two berths . last week , i joined constituents involved in citizen science projects testing water quality in the river stour . the findings were deeply concerning : the very high levels of phosphates and nitrates in the water are clear evidence of the ongoing damage to our waterways . will my hon . friend join me in commending the important work of volunteers in citizen science projects , and does he agree that the environment agency must be properly resourced to monitor water quality in our rivers , brooks , streams and seas ? i agree . the ministers are really lucky in so many ways . they are in the best the department and — like few others in government — they have an army of volunteers to call upon who will be their arms and legs out in the community . we ask the government to empower those volunteers even more . if there is one more intervention , i will take it . [ interruption . ] no ? then i will now plough on to the bitter end , which is not too far off , i promise . people have talked about blue flag status . that is one of the key proposals in the motion . the point of blue flag status for rivers , chalk streams and lakes is that it is a practical way of forcing water companies to be more accountable for the safety of swimmers and for the ongoing protection of precious habitats and ecosystems . we call on the government to introduce a blue corridor programme for rivers , chalk streams and lakes to ensure clean and healthy water through the creation of a new blue flag status . many rivers and lakes have sites with bathing water status , including near coniston and windermere in my own patch , but what will surprise many people is the fact that having bathing water status means just that a location will be tested more frequently ; it does not automatically mean that it is any cleaner . there were over 24,000 sewage spills last year into our bathing waters alone , for a duration of over 179,000 hours . surfers against sewage found that the government ’s new bathing water feasibility test lacking . it said : “ this step could mean that sites that are deemed too polluted risk being immediately denied this designation , and therefore unable to receive the monitoring and investment needed to make blue spaces cleaner and safer ” . as my hon . friend in contrast , blue flag status would be granted only at those sites where the data showed that the water is clean and safe . we would give swimmers and other river users proper evidence - based confidence in the safety of the water . if evidence were needed that our proposals are desperately needed , surfers against sewage received 1,853 sickness reports from contact with our waterways in 2024 alone — that is nine years of sick days . as a brief aside , because it is so important and central to what we are trying to achieve , we want to provide special protection for our chalk streams . they are rare , ecologically unique habitats that are often referred to as england ’s rainforests , yet even they have come under threat from sewage dumping in recent years . blue flag status for chalk streams would drive their recovery after years of abuse . to conclude , to represent the precious lakes and dales of westmorland and lonsdale is a massive privilege , and it is also a huge responsibility . we know in our community that it is our collective calling to steward the epic slice of creation that surrounds us , including the stunning waters , meres and tarns of the lake district , our coasts and our rivers . they are not ours to keep ; they are ours to preserve for the people of these islands and beyond , and for the people of this generation and the generations that we shall never meet . politics is also a great calling . in this case , it allows us to establish the structures that will enable that stewardship of our waterways to be effective , to be more than just words and to mean practical change for the better . our motion today gives the house the opportunity to do practical good , and to do so now , without further dither or delay . residents in every community of our country want us to listen to them and to act to end the sewage scandal . we must not let them down . i beg to move an amendment , to leave out from “ house ” to end and insert “ recognises that the government inherited a broken water system , with record levels of sewage being pumped into waterways ; welcomes the government ’s rapid delivery of its promise to put water companies under tough special measures through the landmark water ( special measures ) act 2025 , which has introduced new powers to ban the payment of unfair bonuses to water bosses who fail to protect the environment and to bring tough criminal charges against them if they break the law ; supports the government ’s work to secure over £ 100 billion of private sector investment to upgrade the crumbling sewage infrastructure ; and backs the largest review of the water sector since privatisation , aimed at tackling inherited systemic issues in order to clean up uk rivers , lakes and seas for good . ” i welcome the chance to set out the action that the government are taking to end the sewage scandal in our waterways once and for all . the staggeringly high level of sewage pouring into our rivers , lakes and seas is a national disgrace . the beach in deal that i visited just a couple of weeks ago was forced to cancel its boxing day swim because of toxic levels of sewage in the water . the world - famous boat race between the oxford and cambridge university boat clubs earlier this month was , yet again , overshadowed by concerns about water quality in the thames , so much so that rowers were told not to throw their teammates into the river . the secretary of state mentions the boat race , but in 10 weeks we will be welcoming the world ’s rowers to the henley royal regatta . does he share my concern about the amount of sewage being dumped in that part of the thames , which is blighting the event ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for his intervention and i share his concerns . wherever it is happening and damaging people ’s ability to enjoy our rivers , it is a disgrace and a scandal , and we want to work across the house to put that right . parents across the country should not have to worry about letting their children splash about in the river or paddle in the sea on a sunny bank holiday weekend . i recently met campaigners at windermere , in the constituency of up and down the country , the public are furious about water pollution . so am i and so is this house , so how did we get into this situation ? i am afraid to say it is the toxic result of years of failure by the previous conservative government . instead of fixing our sewage system before a problem turned into a crisis , the conservatives stood back and let water companies divert millions of pounds of their customers ’ money into the pockets of their bosses and shareholders . over £ 25 million was paid in bonuses to water company chief executives during the last parliament alone . the tories left our water infrastructure to crumble into ruin . putting party politics aside for a moment , i point out to the secretary of state that southern water was fined a record amount of £ 90 million for dumping raw sewage in 2021 . last year , it received another fine for dumping sewage in rivers near southampton . this year , bills have risen by almost 50 % for residents in fareham and waterlooville . southern water now proposes to recycle effluent water in budds farm near my constituency , to distribute drinking water to residents in fareham and waterlooville . will the secretary of state do the right thing and reject southern water ’s proposal , which is expensive , disruptive and dubious ? i do not trust southern water , and my constituents do not trust it either . i hope that the right hon . and learned lady will work with the government and support the reforms we are bringing forward to improve the functioning and performance of the water sector and all the water companies up and down the country , so that we can prevent the kind of concerns she speaks about . let us look at the record of the past government . if somebody sees a crack in the wall of their house and they leave it for 10 years , the problem gets much worse and it costs much more to put it right . that is exactly what happened with our sewage system . the result is that rivers , lakes and seas across this country are choked by record levels of raw human filth , and bills are rising to repair damage that could have been repaired at a much lower cost if it had been done earlier . i am afraid that the tories polluted our waterways and left bill payers to pay the price for their failure . it is no wonder that they stand condemned as the sewage party . my constituency is served by thames water , which is the largest provider in the country . every week in my surgery , it is fair to say that i have people who have frankly given up on this issue ever being fixed . will the secretary of state provide my constituents and the rest of the country with the reassurance that this labour government will fix the issues left by the conservatives ? as my hon . friend will have seen , we have already passed the water ( special measures ) act 2025 , which gives the regulators more teeth to enforce against the polluting water companies . we look forward to sir jon cunliffe ’s review for the independent water commission ; we will get the interim report next month and the final report the month after that , which will lead to further action to reset this sector once and for all . on the subject of the act , it is wonderful to hear the secretary of state say that he wants to take criminal action against water companies and water bosses , but i tabled an amendment to do just that that was rejected by the government . now that the act has passed , it is interesting that the government are so keen . why did they not just accept my amendment , or a similar one ? the act does not mention criminal charges or what they will do , as my amendment did , but it passed without that measure being put in place . the government are now saying from a point of retrospective gleefulness at the dispatch box that they would like to put that in . is that actually going to happen ? with the greatest respect , the hon . lady ’s party had 14 years to take action , and did nothing . although i am grateful to the liberal democrats for calling this debate , and i think there are many points of similarity between our approaches , i must gently point to some of the opportunities they missed to take action when they were in government . for instance , the environment agency had its funding cut by more than half between 2010 and 2019 , leading to a fall in prosecutions against water companies and other polluters , and there were liberal democrats in the coalition cabinet that started those cuts . the coalition government published a report in 2011 that wrongly and , in my view , bizarrely concluded that water regulation “ works and is not fundamentally flawed ” . of course , under that coalition government , a liberal democrat minister was responsible for the water sector between 2013 and 2015 , and disappointingly they kept in place the very system of regulation that the hon . member for westmorland and lonsdale quite rightly just criticised . would the secretary of state recognise that the budget papers for 2009 and 2010 show that the then labour chancellor was projecting bigger capital cuts in expenditure than were carried out under the coalition government ? i do not think that decisions taken by the coalition government were the fault of the previous labour government . i am merely gently pointing out that the liberal democrats did have a chance to reset regulation in the way that this government are now doing . where they offer their support for that work , i am grateful for it ; by working constructively right across the house , we can make sure that we now reset a water sector that has failed the public , consumers ’ investment and the environment for far too long . in my constituency , the cut runs from binfield all the way through to the thames . that river had 615 hours - worth of sewage pumped into it last year , and my constituent danny ’s dog had to be put down , having got so ill from swimming in that water . does the secretary of state agree that no matter how many fines we levy against thames water , which ultimately come back to our bills — we have to pay for them — they will do absolutely nothing to deter the shareholders and make them invest properly where needed ? the hon . gentleman makes a very powerful case for why reform is so desperately needed . my condolences to the owner of the dog — that is a terrible thing to happen to anybody . bill payers in my constituency of shipley are facing an 18 % hike in their bills . by 2030 , the increase could be as high as 35 % . about 19 % of those bills already goes towards servicing the debt of the holding company that owns yorkshire water . is it not the case that our customers are paying the price for the failure of the opposition parties — plural — to address the problems in the water industry during their time in government ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . i am angry about the bill rises , as she is . i am sure that members on both sides of the house are angry about them , but in a very real sense , people are being forced to pay the price for 14 years of conservative failure . previous governments let the sewage scandal spread ; this government will end it once and for all . that work began as soon as we came into office . within one week of the general election , i invited the water company chief executives into my office , and i ringfenced money earmarked for investment in water infrastructure so that it can never again be diverted for the payment of bonuses or dividends . i welcome the rapid action that this government have taken to hold failing water companies to account . does the secretary of state share my view that it is simply disgraceful that water company ceos such as yorkshire water ’s nicola shaw — who paid herself a £ 371,000 bonus — were able to pay themselves multimillion - pound bonuses while overseeing record levels of sewage spills ? my hon . friend is absolutely right , which is why we have given the regulator new powers through the water ( special measures ) act 2025 . the conservative party could have done so at any point during its 14 years in power , but at no point did it take that common - sense action . we passed that landmark piece of legislation , which became law in february . it gives the regulator tough new powers to hold water companies to account , bans unfair bonuses when water company bosses fail to meet high standards , and imposes stricter penalties — including up to two years in prison — if water company employees obstruct investigations by environmental regulators , as well as severe and automatic fines for wrongdoing . environmental regulators can now recover costs for successful enforcement , meaning that the polluter pays and the regulators gain new resources to enforce more effectively . i suggest to the secretary of state that the problem may be more deep - seated than we realise . he mentioned algal blooms in the lake district . not only do those blooms turn the water a strange colour ; they suck the oxygen out of the water , leading to the death of wildlife in the water . furthermore , sewage contains heavy metals and other toxic substances that can kill fish or affect their ability to reproduce , so we may find ecosystems that have been damaged over a much longer term than we realise . i recognise the catastrophe that the hon . member is talking about . it is not just that the water is polluted ; the water becomes toxic , and it is killing ecosystems and damaging the wider environment . those are all reasons that we need to move ahead quickly with the reforms that this government are working towards . rose — i will give way two more times and then i had better make some progress , or madam deputy speaker will chastise me as she chastised the hon . member for westmorland and lonsdale . the secretary of state is right to outline the legislation he is bringing forward , but on the ground there is still frustration about pollution in rivers , such as in botley in my constituency . we are still seeing overflows — not from sewage but from development pollutants going into the river — and parish councils are identifying them quickly and coming to me , but the accountability structures behind water companies such as southern water will not answer to elected members like me . we are still not seeing the improvement that the secretary of state is advocating at the dispatch box . will he agree to meet me and my parish council to hear our concerns ? can he outline briefly how the sewage legislation that he has just brought forward will add to that accountability for parish councils and local residents ? the hon . member makes an important point . one issue that sir jon cunliffe and the water commission are looking at is how we can increase accountability and responsiveness directly to customers and , indeed , to authorities such as the parish councils he has just talked about . i would be happy to arrange a meeting for him with the appropriate minister . the secretary of state referred to rare ecological rivers that can be damaged by sewage pollution . in my constituency , we have a very rare chalk stream , the river ver . thames water says that many of the sewage spills happen because the pipes are old and porous . part of the solution is to line them , but when thames water is lining pipes , it is not prioritising pipes that are close to rare chalk streams . will the secretary of state meet me to discuss my chalk streams ( sewerage investment ) bill , which would make water companies prioritise those pipes that are close to chalk streams , because of their rare ecological status ? i know the river ver very well ; i used to walk past it every day on my way to primary school at the abbey primary school at the bottom of the abbey orchard . i would be happy to make sure that the hon . lady gets a meeting with the appropriate minister to raise those points . the additional new resources that our reforms will give to the regulators are underpinned by mandatory monitoring of storm overflows and pollution incidents . water companies in england and wales must now publish information on the frequency and duration of discharges from every single storm overflow within one hour of the discharge happening . we have extended that to emergency overflows , so that all spills will be publicly reported in near real time . we expect water companies to monitor 50 % of them by 2030 and the rest by 2035 . companies are now required to publish their annual pollution incident reduction plans and implementation reports to outline the progress they have made and show the public that they have a credible plan to end the scandal of water pollution . those measures give the water regulators new powers to hold water companies to account and ensure that customers and the environment always come first . we can and we will turn the water sector around . we have secured more than £ 104 billion of private sector investment in the water sector over the next five years . that is the biggest investment in our water sector in its history , and the second biggest investment in any part of the economy over the lifetime of this parliament . it will build and upgrade water infrastructure in every single region of the country , cut sewage spills by 45 % compared with 2021 levels and drastically improve the quality of water in our rivers , lakes and seas . it will allow us to move ahead with nine new reservoirs and nine large - scale water transfer schemes , and reduce leaks from crumbling pipes , so that we have a reliable water supply for the future . this vast investment will create tens of thousands of jobs up and down the country , allow us to go ahead with building 1.5 million new homes , support 150 major infrastructure projects and power new industries with high water usage , such as data centres . this is the regional economic growth that the country voted for last year ; this is the labour party ’s plan for change in action . i think that members in all parts of the house agree with much of what the secretary of state is saying . i am fortunate enough to have the beautiful river trent in my constituency , along with the sow and the penk , but new housing developments , which he mentioned , are a big issue , because the run - off from them is not properly attenuated . how could that best be dealt with ? building homes for the right reasons sometimes has unintended consequences . the right hon . gentleman is entirely right , and i have asked sir jon cunliffe to consider measures that we could implement to start to address that and , indeed , wider issues involving nutrient neutrality in our waterways . rose — i will make some progress , because i do not want to take up too much of the debate . last month the water minister and i toured the country to see where and how the investment will be spent — from windermere to the wye , from hampshire to yorkshire , and to suffolk , northumbria and somerset . in windermere , we are working with local groups and organisations to eliminate all sewage discharges into the lake . that includes schemes that allow owners of septic tanks to connect them to the mains sewer network so that they no longer discharge directly into the water . on the river wye we are running a £ 1 million joint research initiative with the welsh government to tackle water - quality issues across the catchment . we are working with local farmers , environmental groups and citizen scientists to investigate the sources of the pollution so that we can tackle them effectively . will the secretary of state give way ? i will make some progress , if the hon . gentleman does not mind too much . the south - east of england will face severe water shortages by 2030 if we do not act urgently , so we are supporting new infrastructure such as the havant thicket reservoir , which will store nearly 9 billion litres of water when it is completed . this is just the start of our wider plan to fundamentally reset the water sector so that it is fit for the future . i am grateful to sir jon cunliffe , the former deputy governor of the bank of england , for undertaking the biggest review of the water sector since privatisation . he is supported by an advisory group of experts covering the environment , public health , investors , engineering , customers and economics . the failures of regulation and governance that allowed our water system to decline into scandalous failure must never happen again . this summer , sir jon will publish his findings on how we can build the robust regulatory framework that we need to clean up our waterways , build infrastructure for a reliable water supply and restore public confidence . will the secretary of state give way ? if the hon . gentleman does not mind , i will make a little more progress , because i have already taken up more than 20 minutes of other members ’ time . sir jon is looking into how we can embrace a catchment - based approach to cleaning up our rivers , and our farming road map will help farmers to make the transition to more nature - positive farming methods that will reduce agricultural run - off into our waterways . i hope that many members have shared their views as part of the independent water commission ’s call for evidence , which closes at the end of today . the government will respond and consult on the commission ’s recommendations , and we intend to legislate so that we can completely reset our water sector for the future . the water minister has announced reforms to shake up our water bathing regulations for the first time in more than a decade , so that more people , whether they are swimmers , paddleboarders or surfers , can get outside and enjoy our waters safely . our proposed measures would remove the fixed bathing season dates from the regulations to better reflect when people actually use our waters , and would allow greater flexibility in monitoring . will the secretary of state give way ? i will this time , because the hon . gentleman has been very persistent . i thank the secretary of state . i have just been reading about his core reforms , and i note that , as he has said , core reform 3 changes the way in which the season for bathing is determined . however , it continues the principle that water is not tested by the environment agency throughout the year . this is an important omission that must be rectified . during a bathing season , the water can become polluted . will the secretary of state consider introducing all - year - round testing for our blue flag areas ? order . before the secretary of state responds , i would like him to consider the fact that more than 30 colleagues wish to contribute . the longer he speaks , the less likely it is that they will all get in . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i will not take any more interventions . i hear the hon . gentleman ’s point . public health is a priority in the reforms that we are making . the environment agency must consider public safety and the environment when it assesses applications for bathing waters , and remove the harmful automatic designation of bathing waters so that we can continue to invest in and improve these sites . applications for new bathing waters will open next month , adding to the more than 450 bathing waters around the country . details of how to apply are online . the sewage scandal ends with this labour government . our groundbreaking water ( special measures ) act will give the regulators tough new powers to hold water companies to account . they will no longer get away with polluting our waterways and rewarding themselves with undeserved bonuses for what they have done . this is a fresh start for the water sector — a fundamental reset that will clean up our waterways , create thousands of jobs , grow the economy and give us a reliable water supply for decades to come . exciting progress is already being made . the thames tideway tunnel was fully activated in february — an amazing feat of british engineering and entrepreneurial spirt that will reduce sewage spills into the thames by around 95 % . since coming into operation , the tunnel has captured enough sewage to fill wembley stadium five times over and stopped it pouring into the river . i want to see innovation like that not just in london but right across the country , bringing investment , driving regional economic growth and cleaning up our waterways for good . many of us cherish memories from childhood of summer holidays on the beach , exploring rock pools or splashing about in the waves . today ’s children deserve to make the same magical memories . this is our moment to give our children back the future that is their birthright , to restore pride in our rivers , lakes and seas , to end the sewage scandal and to clean up our waterways for good . that is the prize , and this is the government who will make it happen . rose — order . because the front - bench contributions have been so substantial , back benchers will now be on a time limit of three minutes . i call the shadow secretary of state . i respect the fact that this is the liberal democrats ’ opposition day debate , so i have been cutting parts out of my speech . i therefore hope the house will forgive me if i do not take every intervention that is offered to me . i thank the liberal democrats for choosing to debate this important issue . we all know and agree that there are fundamental problems facing the water and sewerage industry . a drainage and sewerage system that was first built in the victorian era does not meet the needs of the population it must now serve , or the pressures of more frequent and severe weather events . to fix the problem , we must first diagnose it and measure it . that is why the previous government took the essential step of radically overhauling the monitoring of storm overflows . on previous occasions , the secretary of state has dismissed the significance of that data collection and monitoring . that is unfair , because when we came into government in 2010 , the labour government had left us and the liberal democrats in the coalition government with a water system that was out of control ; just 7 % of storm overflows were monitored . in other words , people across the country were swimming and playing in water without knowing that it had been contaminated with raw sewage . i had the pleasure of going to school in blackpool , and there were certain times of the summer season when locals would not venture into the sea , because we knew the consequences of daring to do so . the point i would make to everyone in this chamber is that this is a long - standing set of problems . to pretend otherwise — i know some people get a little carried away with their advocacy — does not do the public , our constituents or , indeed , our waterways the justice that they deserve . we are proud of the fact that by the time we left government we had met our ambitious target to ensure that 100 % of storm overflows were monitored . the importance of that is emphasised — will the right hon . lady give way ? i will just finish this point , and then i will take the intervention . the importance of that is emphasised by the interventions we have already had , because members across this house have been citing the very stark and shocking statistics on storm overflows , sewage overflows and so on in their constituencies . they have rightly relied on those figures already in this debate , and i have no doubt that they will rely on them in their speeches as well . in the dark days before 2010 , their predecessors would not have had that information . [ laughter . ] i see a labour member — i thank the shadow minister for giving way . monitoring sewage overflows does not immediately improve the health of our environment or of the public . it is the first minimum step to be able to take meaningful action , but i am sorry to say that the previous government failed to take meaningful action . between 2021 and 2023 , dewsbury and batley experienced a massive number of sewage spills , totalling 4,604 incidents with a total duration of a staggering 28,383 hours or approximately three and a quarter years . does the right hon . member agree with me and my constituents that the privatisation of the water industry has been a total and abject failure , causing significant harm to our environment , public health and wildlife , and — order . the hon . member will know that interventions need to be brief , and should not be prepared and read out from a script . i thank the hon . gentleman , who has in fact lined up the next paragraph my speech — it is extraordinary — because this improved knowledge must lead to action . will the right hon . lady give way ? no . i will come to the hon . gentleman in due course . i have said that this is the liberal democrats ’ opposition day debate , and i will give them the respect that they deserve . the improved knowledge must lead to action . as i am delighted the secretary of state acknowledged , one of the most tangible improvements in the past decade is just a few metres away under our feet — the thames tideway tunnel . sadly , he did not have the generosity of spirit to acknowledge the role that the conservative government played in that . this multibillion - pound infrastructure project , announced and delivered by the conservative government , has already stopped 500,000 tonnes of sewage flowing into the river thames since it started operating in february . over time , the 16 mile pipe is expected to stop 95 % of sewage spills that would previously have polluted the river thames . that meaningful action is already making a real difference to our nation ’s capital — built on the data that some laugh at — and i ask genuinely : where is labour ’s plan for more ? in government , we also wanted to clear up the water industry and our environment . it was the environment act 2021 , passed by the last government , that gave stronger powers to regulators and imposed strict demands for tackling pollution . we set legally binding targets to improve water quality and availability , and to reduce nutrient pollution . we rolled out catchment - sensitive farming to all farms in england . we stepped up the requirements for investment , including investment from water companies , and storm overflow improvements . after 14 years in opposition , the labour party should have come into office with a plan of what more needs to be done to fix this century - old problem and , what is more , have set that plan in action last summer with energy and gusto . [ interruption . ] the secretary of state is chuntering from a sedentary position , but may i say what a delight it is to see him in the chamber ? normally , he is running frit from farmers . instead of a plan , we have had an underwhelming trickle — a review , yet another talking shop forum that has done nothing other than have a meeting , and a bill which , as we said during its passage , sets out much of what was already happening . as with every other part of this government , ministers had no plan , and they are now trying to come up with one . will the right hon . lady give way ? i will give way in a moment . for example , the secretary of state recently pledged to clean up lake windermere so that only rainwater flows into it . it was a laudable ambition . who can disagree with that ambition ? however , he gave no timeframe and no plan for delivering this vision . i have also visited the constituency of a significant amount of the government ’s supposedly groundbreaking water legislation , including the measures on monitoring , blocking bonuses , and fines , was already brought in by the previous government . sadly , they rejected our amendment to maintain the important water restoration fund to protect waterways , including chalk streams , many of which are in my constituency . i genuinely hope that they will reconsider that . rose — i am very happy to give way if the hon . lady is going to support and carry on our work — delighted , in fact . i would never wish to be impolite and i will not be now , but i think the right hon . lady will find that our argument on the water restoration fund was that it did not need primary legislation to happen . what has happened since then , madam deputy speaker , is that everyone who has been successful in applying for the water restoration fund has been contacted and the money has already been offered , so i think the right hon . lady ’s information might be slightly out of date . i am delighted to hear that . i gently suggest that that was not the response the hon . lady gave when we were debating it and pressing her to put it in the bill . it is precisely because we did our job of scrutinising the bill and trying to improve it that , i am delighted to hear , she has now put that into action . another example — i am happy to take another intervention from her — is that we tabled an amendment to limit the amount of debt that water companies could accumulate , as well as an amendment to protect bill payers . sadly , both were rejected . the hon . lady is welcome to intervene . is she doing that ? no intervention . well , we have not got that commitment . i am genuinely happy to give way to her , because i want to improve her legislation . the right hon . lady is rather keen to hear from me and i am happy to offer to intervene . the water commission is looking at levels of debt . the shadow minister , wow ! where is the energy ? where is the gusto ? rewriting history seems to be a theme this week for the government , but there we go . that is a little bit delicate for labour back benchers , given the discussions this week . we banned bonuses for the bosses of water companies that have committed criminal breaches and water companies that illegally pollute our rivers can be prosecuted , making it clear that polluters will pay for damage to our natural environment . i hope that in her wind - up , the minister will answer the point made by my hon . friend the secretary of state , as is his nervous tic , merely fell back on whatever they say about the past , rather than setting out his vision for the future . i can always tell when i am getting to him , bless him . we quadrupled water company inspections and set in place a plan to have 4,000 inspections a year by april 2025 , increasing to 10,000 a year from april 2026 . will the government commit to that vital work , or will the chancellor cut the department for environment , food and rural affairs budget so starkly that they are cancelled ? we have the stunning river derwent running through derby , but it was polluted by sewage 2,675 times in 2024 , lasting over 15,000 hours . i invite the right hon . member to take responsibility for cutting the environment agency budget by half , leaving it without the powers and resources to combat this kind of sewage . it is a brave rural constituency mp who defends the activities of the environment agency . with some of the disappointments that local residents have had with the environment agency , particularly in my part of the world , there is real work to do there . rose — i am still answering the hon . lady ’s first intervention . of course , she is relying on the data — that is exactly the point . again , i come back to the point — i am trying to be constructive and collegiate in the way i am dealing with this . [ laughter . ] the public will hear the laughter ; that is what government members do not understand . i am trying to be constructive . we managed to collect that data and we had significant infrastructure investment in the thames tideway tunnel , as i have explained . however , as i have always said at this dispatch box , there is more to do , so we genuinely will support constructive efforts by the government . that is why we scrutinise their legislation so carefully and why we put forward perfectly proper amendments to the water ( special measures ) act . i am delighted that the government have taken our suggestion on the water restoration fund so seriously and have enacted that . however , we must not conduct this conversation with quite the emotional distress that the secretary of state seems to be in at the moment . of course , the liberal democrats know the scale of the challenge , as there was a liberal democrat water minister for a large part of the coalition government . that fact seems to have been missed in their motion today — i am sure it was just an oversight . the liberal democrats want to see even more progress with the blue flag scheme , and we agree with them on that . since 2010 , the number of designated bathing waters has increased , and we have seen a significant improvement in water quality ratings , with more water rated as excellent or good , and an increase in blue flag beaches . as a proud coastal mp , i want to see many more blue flag beaches like mablethorpe and sutton on sea on our glorious lincolnshire coastline , and i will , of course , support meaningful efforts to achieve that . if i may , i will just ask for a point of clarity from the liberal democrats . in 2023 , they called for a ban on bank holiday sewage discharges — again , a laudable ambition . however , it was pointed out to i will finish on this point , madam deputy speaker . i emphasise again that we all care about the quality of our waterways . as we showed with the water ( special measures ) act , we will work constructively across the house to improve our waterways and the legislation put forward by the government . i am proud to be leading the policy renewal work for farming , food , fishing , environment and water for the conservative party with my excellent shadow ministerial team , my hon . friends the members for epping forest ( dr hudson ) and for keighley and ilkley ( robbie moore ) . we will be watching and scrutinising the government ’s work on water carefully . the promises the secretary of state is making now will be remembered by our constituents , by colleagues across the house and by voters , as , i am afraid , his promises are remembered by our farmers . i thank the liberal democrats for securing this important debate . they are asking the government today for three key commitments : to take urgent action to end the sewage scandal ; to provide greater protection against sewage dumping ; and to ensure that the public know when rivers are clean and safe . i have some great news for the liberal democrats , because we have pretty much delivered all that already . this labour government acted urgently to bring forward the water ( special measures ) act — it was one of our first pieces of legislation in our first king ’s speech and became law this february — to end the disgraceful behaviour of the water companies . the legislation does exactly what it says on the tin : it puts our disgraceful water companies into special measures , just like a school that has failed its ofsted exam . the government are wading in to ramp up regulation and enforcement of these companies . we will ensure that their focus is back on consumers — their experience , their service level and their bills — so we have been working on additional regulation . the liberal democrats talked about a lack of resourcing , but from what we have heard today — this is also in the water ( special measures ) act — it is very clear that the polluter will pay and that water companies ’ fines will come back into the ea to put the much - needed resourcing where it should be . we heard the shadow secretary of state bemoaning the laughter from labour members . i think the laughter was at the idea that people in this country should be grateful to the conservatives for the condition in which they left our waterways . does my hon . friend share our amusement at that ridiculous thought ? rose — order . the shadow secretary of state will know that she can not intervene on an intervention , which , by the way , was far too long . i think we will go back to julia buckley . i thank my hon . friend for his amusing intervention , but more important is the measure in the 2025 act that bans bonuses when the high standards of our environmental protections are not met . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . labour back benchers should know this by now . order . the shadow secretary of state will know that that was not a point of order , but a point of debate . perhaps we had best return to julia buckley . i thank you , madam deputy speaker , for your excellent chairmanship . our important bill has not just banned bonuses , but introduced criminal liability , which will mean that , finally , chief executives and senior leadership figures can end up in prison for up to two years . we have also introduced mandatory electronic sensors , which monitor the overflows in real time . this is objective data that is measured in real time , and , crucially , as this is an important question from the liberal democrats , that data is available to the public . will my hon . friend give way ? forgive me , but i must make some progress . we have also forced the water companies to deliver on their five - year investment plans for sustainable urban drainage to rectify the inadequate infrastructure , which has not kept pace with capacity over the past 30 years . in shropshire , which i represent , that means an additional investment of £ 500 million to rectify our sewage drainage over the next five years . i have been an mp for only a few months , but in that short time i am proud of the government ’s swift and decisive action to immediately curtail the excesses of the privatised water industry . in my constituency of shrewsbury , we have significant sewage outflows in the town centre , as the beautiful river severn completely loops round the centre , with over 30 combined sewage overflows . underground , we have inadequate victorian infrastructure , which has been ignored under our cobbled streets . the water ( special measures ) act could not come quickly enough for my constituents in shrewsbury . it has already delivered all three asks of the liberal democrats in today ’s debate : we have taken urgent action ; we have legislated to protect consumers against sewage dumping ; and we have ensured that the public have the information they need . no one can question this government ’s commitment to cleaning up water . the only question is why the liberal democrats voted against this important act . the pollution of rivers is an issue that strikes close to home for many of us . just last november , wessex water was fined half a million pounds for pumping raw sewage into clackers brook , a small river rising in bromham and flowing 5 miles through melksham in my constituency . this incident resulted in the deaths of more than 2,000 fish , including all aquatic life within a 1 km radius of the leak . the systems in place simply can not handle the pressure brought to bear by the increasing volatility in rainfall levels seen in recent times . i have also been to visit the home of one of my constituents in west lavington , where a manhole had been lifted from its housing as a result of a downpour . toxic sewage then polluted a nearby chalk stream , damaging its unique ecosystem that is home to a variety of species , including trout . these kinds of incidents can not be allowed to persist . the current antiquated piping system does not satisfy modern demand . water companies must update and future - proof these systems , and we need them to do so now . i was pleased to see wessex water — credit where it is due — invest £ 2 million in a sewage storage facility in bradford - on - avon to ensure that it can mitigate increased pressure on sewage pipes . however , it is clear that more must be done to protect our vital aquatic ecosystems . we must be clear that this is not just a problem for water companies . developments in farming practices have led to detrimental impacts on both soil quality and river health . acreage dedicated to the production of maize trebled between 1990 and 2000 , making it one of the uk ’s fastest growing crops . however , maize allows for high levels of surface run - off , causing soil degradation and the pollution of our rivers . that makes it one of the most damaging crops . the rise in intensive poultry units is another area of concern . chicken manure contains far higher levels of phosphates than manure from other farmed animals , and it starves fish and river plants of oxygen . run - off from chicken farms or indeed fields spread with chicken manure is catastrophic to our waterways . we must expect better from our water companies . investment in infrastructure must rise with the demands of the modern world . in stroud , severn trent has invested £ 25 million to stop overflow of sewage into the river frome . together with natural flood management from our district council , we have made rivers cleaner , and as a keen swimmer i am grateful for that . would the hon . member acknowledge that some water companies have been investing heavily ? as i have just said , in bradford - on - avon , similar investments have been made — credit where credit is due . i will come back to the important issues about farming . we should also approach the issue of river pollution in a far more holistic manner , acknowledging the various factors , including agriculture , that contribute to the fact that just 14 % of our waterways are in good health . we have had a wonderful surf around the uk ’s rivers , lakes and seas this afternoon . every single one of us in this house will have a waterway in our constituency , and we have all had to endure the worst impacts of the 14 years of negligence and failure that almost killed some of our rivers . the wye and the usk , which run through my constituency , are two fantastic examples of waterways that sadly have been affected for too long . run - off from agriculture , liquid waste from industry and sewage resulting from inadequate investment by failing water companies have all added up to increased phosphate levels in our rivers . tests in the usk have shown scarily high levels of e - coli in the water , which made it unsafe for bathing and stopped local people enjoying the river in the ways they should be able to — sploshing through streams and jumping into the sea , as the secretary of state spoke about earlier . we should all be able to swim , kayak and canoe without fear of nasty infection . tourism has suffered , as have businesses like the one run by angela jones , whose livelihood depends on the river in monmouthshire . i want to pay tribute to the brilliant citizen scientists and campaigners in my constituency who tirelessly work to save our local rivers , including friends of the river wye , save the river usk , and the wye catchment partnership . members of our communities up and down the uk are testing and monitoring rivers for pollution and are coming up with innovative cross - border solutions . the good news is that this government have paid attention to people in monmouthshire and all over england and wales . the last government had an unfunded , pie - in - the - sky action plan for the river wye that only looked at england . water flows across borders , and i am so pleased that , as the secretary of state so eloquently mentioned , the two labour governments in westminster and cardiff have made progress and put £ 1 million into the river wye so that we can clean it up once and for all . the water ( special measures ) act has made extraordinary progress in making sure that polluters are accountable . it will strengthen ofwat ’s powers so that it can better hold water companies to account and bring tough criminal charges against those who break the law . this is only the beginning . we know that there is much more to do , and the upcoming cunliffe review will help us to do that , but i am so proud that the labour government have achieved more in nine months than the previous government did in 14 years — and , notably , more than the liberal democrats also did in coalition . my constituency contains the source of the thames , so i could , in theory , row from my constituency to the house . i would like to celebrate the opening of the thames tideway tunnel , as mentioned by the secretary of state . back in 2013 , i was campaigning for the tunnel , which included frowning at a sewage outflow under putney bridge , so it could be said that i have been in the excrement for quite some time . sadly , the situation has not improved in the 12 years in between . just this morning , i had ben thornbury , an impressive young man , in my office to commend him on his work cleaning up the river avon in malmesbury . sadly — let no good deed go unpunished — he had picked up sepsis from the pollution in the river . i am grateful to say that he made a full recovery , but , still , that is a sign of the times . perhaps surprisingly , i would like to use a word rarely heard in the context of the water industry : hope . i would like to highlight some ways in which good things are happening , largely at the grassroots level . first , there is citizen science . eighty pollution incidents were reported by citizens just in my constituency in wiltshire and gloucestershire last year . citizen science can often highlight pollution incidents up to three days before official sources of information . in my constituency , i am lucky to have friends of the river frome and frome families for the future who do lots of citizen science in testing the river , but does my hon . friend agree that we should not be relying on such groups to test the water quality and that we need to empower and resource the environment agency to be doing that ? we can not rely on areas that are lucky enough to have these groups . i completely agree . although i commend those grassroots efforts , that is not their job . i was delighted to hear from the secretary of state that we will soon have real - time reporting on water pollution , and i look forward to seeing the visible — and smellable — results of that . it is also the earthwatch waterblitz this weekend , so hon . members may still have time to get their water testing kits do their own bit of citizen science . secondly , again , i applaud local efforts , and especially the malmesbury river valleys trust and the cotswold lakes trust , for doing such exemplary work in taking care of our waterways and our wetlands in the south cotswolds . i recommend to hon . members across the house that we use our power to convene to bring together people around these issues . in the south cotswolds , we recently held two fruitful summits — one on the gloucestershire side and one on the wiltshire side — bringing people together on the issue of flooding . they yielded a lot of enthusiasm , expertise and actionable solutions . however , as my hon . friend we have been hearing all about monitoring in one hour and the huge amounts of discharges . we do not have any of that information in scotland as it is not a requirement for scottish water to release that and the snp government are not taking any steps to do so . we have no idea about the extent of the problem , but we know that it is substantial . will my hon . friend back me in supporting the cause for the scottish government to release the same information as there is england ? i would be more than happy to back my hon . friend ’s calls for an equivalent system in scotland . finally , i thank the government for everything they are already doing to reform the water industry and look forward to seeing real results in our waterways . i will add that , while i welcome the cunliffe review , i was disappointed to find out that the ownership of water companies is outside its scope . i sit on the environment , food and rural affairs committee , and we are also making submissions to the cunliffe review . i do not believe ownership of water is outside the scope of the review . it will be looking at how our water is owned — maybe not nationalisation , but certainly other methods of ownership . i thank the hon . lady for her intervention . that was not what i had been led to believe from a roundtable with sir jon cunliffe , but maybe i misunderstood . the truth is that the profit motive has no place in a vital public utility such as the water industry . we are one of only two countries in the entire world that has a privatised water industry , and clearly it is not working and needs to be reviewed . it is a pleasure to speak in such an important debate , particularly as i represent one of the most beautiful counties , and the largest constituency , in england — as the lib dem spokesman , protecting those rivers is not a luxury or a nice to have ; it is a fundamental duty for those of us who represent those communities . i am incredibly proud to be the mp for such a vibrant and active constituency with such fantastic grassroots campaigners , including dr stephen westgarth and the “ clean tyne ” campaign . conservative members will be aware that he was at one point a conservative county council candidate — i enjoy working cross - party with people , although probably not quite as much in the week before the local elections as in the week after . i also pay tribute to a retiring green party councillor in my constituency , dr nick morphet , the councillor for humshaugh . he has done an excellent job and , despite running against me in the general election , was always good company when i met him on the doorsteps . coming back to slightly hackneyed party politics , i recognise quite how much the sewage issue raises hackles and confirms just what a state of stagnation and decline the country has fallen into . during 2024 , my constituency was polluted 3,991 times , with spillages lasting more than 27,000 hours . dumping sewage is not waste management ; it is environmental destruction and environmental vandalism , and it is particularly devastating in the rural north - east , where so much tourism relies on water . when the minister comes to wind up the debate — she is not in her place , but i hope she will hear this — i hope she will dwell on those communities that rely on water , particularly the really isolated communities such as those in kielder , where they deal with the practicalities of living so sparsely . i often talk about hexham having a very rural population , but when i go to kielder , they look at me coming from hexham as if i had come from vegas . i was at a kielder parish council meeting — it took an hour to get there — where one of the farmers said that if she is feeding her cows , she can not have a shower . that is the kind of sparsity and rurality we are dealing with . i urge the minister , when she comes to her feet , to address that point . if she came to meet the “ clean tyne ” campaign to discuss the difficulties it faces and the work it is doing to combat some of the challenges we face on the tyne , it would be massively appreciated in my constituency . it is wonderful to follow the sewage in our rivers is of great concern to my constituents in beaconsfield , marlow and the south bucks villages , as well as to my parliamentary twin on the government benches . in my constituency , i have worked closely with local action groups in little marlow and farnham common to secure a planned sewage upgrade for the little marlow sewage treatment works , through persistent lobbying of former conservative ministers and current labour ministers . i have repeatedly called for criminal sanctions against water company executives for breaches of their duties , but i have always said that more needs to be done ; in particular , i urge the minister to look again at strengthening the protection for water sports . earlier this year , i tabled two amendments to the water ( special measures ) bill : one to introduce criminal sanctions for water company bosses who fail to report discharges and another to extend protections for water sports to match those for swimming waters . these are serious , meaningful changes needed to further strengthen our oversight of water companies and our waterways . in my constituency , we are rich in water sports along the thames . we have marlow rowing club , marlow canoe club and the upper thames sailing club , to name just three wonderful examples , and our local schools regularly use the river for water sports . my secondary schools are out on the thames on a daily basis , including rowing and using the river , and it would be wonderful to have to protect aquatic sports in legislation . the wonderful river nidd runs through my constituency , which similarly has paddleboarding , kayaking and all sorts of wonderful activities — including the knaresborough bed race , which runs through the river at one point . does the hon . lady not feel regret that the conservative government did not take the steps she is outlining now ? i have been lobbying for these changes for many years , and now that i am in opposition i have been able to table my own amendments , lib dem style ! i was happy that the lib dem spokesperson spoke in support of my amendment during the bill committee . i love that cross - party support and am learning from their wonderful example of taking amendments forward when not in power ; that is fun and enjoyable for us all . i did not table as many as their 42 amendments , but i did put forward two so i am working my way there . i want to see the provisions i have mentioned move forward in any way possible , because they are so important for aquatic sports and for the rivers that we all benefit from and use . i want the same protections for water sports as those proposed for bathing waters , and i would like discharge from emergency overflows blocked within a 1 - mile radius of areas used for aquatic sports , particularly by secondary schools and by children . my hon . friend is making a very powerful speech about water sports , but does she agree that angling is also vital for our rivers ? i met members of the farnham angling society on the river wey some weeks ago , and they were obviously very concerned about the effects of pollution on the angling stocks , which are vital for our rural life . angling is a very important sport that we should be protecting , including by making sure our waterways are clean . a key way to know if our waterways are clean is that the aquatic life comes back . clubs in my constituency would really benefit from the changes and protections i have mentioned . i would like to see them introduced and i hope that the secretary of state will change his mind and adopt something similar to my amendment . the government can feel free to take credit and pretend it is their amendment or change , but i would really like to see those changes brought forward . unfortunately , my two amendments were not accepted , but i will continue to press for them , lib dem style , at any opportunity i can possibly find , because i believe that they would be good for the uk and for our waterways . i hope the government will look seriously again at protecting water sports . i would be delighted to work with them or any party to practically develop the legislative steps needed for that to happen . first , i should declare an interest : i have close relatives working in the water sector , although in science rather than in the water industry . i rise to speak in favour of the amendment in the name of the prime minister , the secretary of state and other ministers . our rivers have suffered from serious sewage pollution over many years and i am pleased the government are now taking action to address this terrible problem . i want to discuss the nature of the action and to raise some important constituency matters . as we have heard this afternoon , for far too long water companies have ignored residents ’ concerns and continued to pump sewage into our rivers , lakes and seas . reading is particularly badly affected because it is downstream of many of the pumping outlet stations further up the thames , as colleagues from the thames valley area have hinted at . i strongly support the measures taken in the government ’s water ( special measures ) act , which tackles the issue . the legislation received royal assent on we heard earlier — my hon . friend i am conscious of time , but i would like to raise some local examples of sewage pollution and other matters related to waterways in the reading area . i have seen — as i spoke about during the debate on the water bill — some appalling incidents of sewage pollution in my area , including seeing a tributary of the thames turn a lurid green after a sewage incident in hampshire , which fed into foudry brook , which is a tributary of the kennet , which ultimately flows into the thames . on friday , i will be testing the water quality in christchurch harbour because we need a conservation policy there , as suggested by the christchurch harbour and marine society . i am also concerned about the river stour in my constituency . does my hon . friend agree that the environment agency could set higher standards for water quality and , in so doing , help to establish the data that shows where areas are falling short ? i am particularly concerned about the river stour , but i know he too will have rivers that he is concerned about . i would of course like to see further work carried out by all agencies . my hon . friend makes a good point about the river in his constituency . in my own constituency , there are a number of rivers , including the thames and the kennet . many flow through heavily populated areas and places where people enjoy walks by the river , and — as i have also seen the way that sewage pollution can interfere with wildlife . in one case , i saw the stark and appalling contrast of visible pollution in the river — foam from sewage and other nitrate pollution — next to a kingfisher . it is sad to see the way that these beautiful rivers are polluted by appalling outflows . like me , my hon . friend will receive hundreds of emails and bits of correspondence on the performance of thames water . does he agree that that company in particular should take the act as if they were being put on notice and that further action may follow if necessary to improve standards ? my hon . friend is right on cue and entices me to the next area i want to talk about , which is the general problems with thames water . those of us who represent constituencies in the thames water area know that it is an appalling company . i do not want to criticise individual members of staff — the head office is in my constituency and many local people work hard there — but , in my experience , the company is poorly managed . i was going to mention a number of other incidents , including two where water was cut off to large parts of reading ’s suburbs and where residents are still waiting for compensation . i have had to write to ofwat to ask it to investigate . i have had other incidents , including the creation of a sinkhole due to a water leak , which has caused severe distress to residents ; i appreciate that that is not sewage , but it is part of the wider water provision network , so i hope that it is in the scope . in this case , residents are having to wait for concrete to be pumped into the chalk in order for the road next to their homes to be stabilised . i have seen a series of wider problems with flooding and other concerns about watercourses not being maintained . will my hon . friend give way ? of course . order . the time limit has been reached . we welcome the water ( special measures ) act 2025 , but we urge the government to go further , particularly with regard to the protection of chalk streams . that is very personal to me and to many members across the house . i have campaigned for many years to stop the dumping of raw sewage and for the better protection of our chalk streams , alongside campaign organisations , the cam valley forum , and the many local river action groups for the mel , the granta , the shep , the rhee , the wilbraham , the orwell and the cherry hinton brook . some progress has been made locally , with the hard - won award of a bathing water designation for the sheep ’s green section of the river cam . that has secured much - needed financing for clean - up actions by anglian water of the small sewage treatment work upstream in haslingfield . however , not all our chalk streams can have bathing water designation as a mechanism of protection , especially when they have to struggle and suffer with overwhelmed small sewage treatment works as a result of unprecedented housing growth and development in our area . that is why i bemoan the fact that the 2025 act and the planning and infrastructure bill do not get rid of the damaging automatic right to connect for developers , which means that water companies can not say whether they have the capacity to manage sewage in the area . my hon . friend talks about overwhelmed sewage works . the markyate sewage works in my constituency has now had 3,000 hours of non - stop overflow , including sewage , which enters our precious chalk streams . does she agree that that is why it is so important that we have blue flag status to increase the responsibility and accountability of water companies , which should not take our chalk streams for granted ? i agree . in my south cambridgeshire constituency alone , rivers and streams were polluted by sewage 728 times in 2024 , lasting over 9,700 hours . that is the disgraceful legacy of the last conservative government . we need the protection that my hon . friend mentions . we bemoan the fact that the secretary of state and the government got rid of the chalk stream recovery pack . that is distressing to all those who care for chalk streams , and it is why we need practical measures such as the blue flag status , and for rivers and chalk streams in a blue flag corridor and water catchments to have the protections they need . that would give the public confidence in water quality and would enable regular water testing , biodiversity checks and better community involvement , boosting transparency . statistics published last week show that welsh water — the supposedly not - for - profit welsh water company — had the highest number of sewage discharges across the entire uk , despite charging some of the highest prices for its water , in a country that has some of the lowest incomes in the uk . does my hon . friend agree that the welsh government must stop letting welsh water off the hook ? it must take responsibility for its actions . my hon . friend makes such a compelling argument for the protections and accountability that are needed in wales . we need better protections for our chalk streams , which are unique habitats for nature . the liberal democrats will continue leading the fight against this sewage scandal . we will continue standing up for nature , our rivers and our chalk streams , so that everyone — us and generations to come — can enjoy them . the future of our rivers , lakes and seas could not be more important , not just for us but for future generations , but after 14 years of conservative failure to act — for a time , propped up by the liberal democrats — their future was looking lost at sea . i am proud that taking action to clean up our rivers , lakes and seas and to hold failing water bosses to account through the water ( special measures ) act 2025 was one of the first actions taken by our new labour government , and i was proud to serve on the bill committee . i know the issue is hugely important to fellow residents across my filton and bradley stoke constituency . locally , we care deeply about our litter , our environment and the future that we are forging for the next generations . walks along the river frome or the bradley brook should not only be safe and healthy , but enjoyable for all . our new labour government inherited a broken water system , with record levels of sewage being pumped into our waterways in towns , villages and cities across the country and along our glorious coastline . that has impacted health , tourism and how we see our places — declining and unloved by the previous government , as profits only grew . this labour government are taking action and will continue to do so to turn the tide . i find it remarkable how little was actually done — not talked about , but done — when the conservatives and the liberal democrats were in government together , yet how willing they are to claim credit for the actions taken by this new labour government , while confusingly seeming to say that not very much is being done . they can not have it both ways . our water ( special measures ) act has introduced new powers to ban the payment of unfair bonuses to water bosses who fail to protect our environment , and to bring tough criminal charges against them personally if they break the law . the work of our dedicated ministers has helped to open up over £ 100 billion of private sector investment to upgrade crumbling sewerage infrastructure . on top of all that , i was glad to hear the secretary of state announce last autumn an independent water commission . the cunliffe commission is the largest review of the water sector since privatisation . it is worth mentioning that anyone can contribute their views to the commission until 11.59 pm tonight , including people at home and members of the parties on the opposition benches — including the liberal democrats . indeed . listening , acting and thinking of future generations : this is clearly a new government . our plan for change will build the infrastructure that britain needs to clean up our rivers , lakes and seas for good , and i look forward to supporting that every step of the way . i thank turning to the motion before us , i am not against introducing a blue flag system for rivers and streams , but that is just tinkering around the edges of a broken system . a shortage of flags and targets is not the problem . last year , the environment agency gave the water companies a collective target of a 40 % reduction in sewage incidents , but what did we have ? a 30 % increase . monitoring and targets are not enough if there is no meaningful action or sanction . i understand that the water companies have well over 1,000 criminal convictions between them — some companies have over 100 convictions — but they are still getting away with it . at the same time , bills are going through the roof by an average of over 20 % in a single year , and by even more for rural constituents , including mine . it is the bill payers , not the shareholders , who are paying the price . customer bills provide an average of 35 % of company revenue to pay the financial costs — the dividends to shareholders and the interest on loans — of the privatised water and sewerage companies in england and wales . in the case of scottish water , a publicly owned company that may have other problems , those costs amounted to just 8 % of revenue from consumer bills . in my constituency , raw sewage discharge increased by 75 % in 2023 , yet there are plans to raise bills by 32 % in the next five years . it is clear that the british public are being ripped off . does the hon . member agree that while better regulation and investment rules may fix some of the issues , the only way to solve the whole problem is to bring the water supply back into public ownership ? i completely agree . that is precisely the thrust of my argument . over the last three decades , shareholders have extracted £ 83 billion in dividends . they have invested effectively less than nothing , because the share capital and retained earnings in those companies are now lower than they were at the time of privatisation . the capital investment has been taken out of customer bills , yet customers are still paying through the nose . a professor at the university of greenwich — i have his report here — has shown that the cost of the investment needed in the water industry would be much lower under public ownership than under private ownership . it is clear that , ultimately , public ownership is the only way to gain the control needed to ensure that this essential public utility works for the public benefit , yet the labour party is unfortunately not willing to consider it . the government have the power to bring failing companies into special administration via the high court , but during the passage of the water ( special measures ) act , the minister said : “ special administration must be a last resort , as it has significant consequences for a company ’s investors . ”––[official report , water ( special measures ) public bill committee , that speaks volumes about who the government think our water industry is for . it is not for those so - called investors — actually extractors — who have taken out so many dividends paid for by debt while neglecting our infrastructure and killing our waterways with sewage . there should be significant consequences for them . the people of this country — the british people — do not want their water to be investable : they want it to be clean , reliable , affordable and in public hands . public ownership is the key element of the solution to the sewage scandal . as hard as it may be to believe , on saturday i went surfing at gwithian beach — well known to across the central and western area of cornwall , 10 % of all the wave project ’s sessions have to be cancelled due to sewage pollution . all along the north coast of my constituency , in portreath , porthtowan , perranporth and st agnes , which is the location of the head office of surfers against sewage , we are regularly polluted . according to the house of commons library , in 2024 there were 142 spills at portreath , lasting more than 2,500 hours . in total , there were 975 spills last year in my constituency , lasting for an estimated 8,847 hours . those numbers are shocking to me and to my constituents , who have a right to clean bathing water and a safe natural environment . however , i am delighted that this government are taking action through new , tougher penalties for water executives , a ban on bonuses for senior leadership failing to meet standards , mandatory monitoring and reporting , and a model for cost recovery to better resource the environment agency , which had its funding slashed under the tories . although many discharges still go unpunished , we are acting to clean up the conservatives ’ foul , stinking mess while the liberal democrats carp from the sidelines , making cheap but transparent pre - local election political points and stating the blindingly obvious as though it was some sort of political revelation , with the indignation of a party that has never had to worry about actually making government policy . it is under this labour government that the conservatives ’ sewage scandal will end . i thank my hon . friend it is one day short of nine months since the first prime minister ’s question time of this parliament . on that day , it was my privilege to pose the first question to the prime minister , and i asked him about the levels of sewage being pumped by thames water into the river evenlode in my constituency . he said that “ customers should not pay the price for mismanagement by water companies ” , and added that “ it falls to this government … to fix the mess of that failure . ”—[official report , however , since that date , thames water has pumped sewage into the evenlode for a further 1,050 hours , while hiking bills for my constituents by over 30 % on the problem is that pumping sewage into our rivers and waterways is now routine — indeed , it is so routine that it happens even when there has been no excess rainwater or storms . on the river ray , for example , there were seven and a half hours of sewage - spilling on at the same time , thames water is failing its domestic customers in my constituency . these include mark hamilton in garden city , kidlington , who purchased pumps to try to keep sewage out of his and his elderly neighbour ’s home , but they were not enough ; colin fletcher in bladon , who had sewage flood into his garden in september and still awaits a repair from thames water ; ros frangopoulus in chesterton , who saw sewage lap against her house walls and was left with faeces and toilet paper in her garden when the water receded ; and martin johnson in yarnton , who could not use his toilet as it routinely overflowed into his home with sewage and now has a tanker stationed next to his house , loudly pumping 24/7 while thames water takes months to agree a sewer repair . in short , we have a company that pollutes our rivers and waterways and the homes and gardens of its customers , while all the time rewarding its executives handsomely and spending an increasing share of billpayers ’ money to service excessive debt . the prime minister told me that his government would fix this mess , but i regret that the water ( special measures ) act does not go nearly far enough . we need a powerful , effective and public - interested clean water authority to clean up the water companies ’ act . i thank only two weeks ago , this government recalled parliament to save british steel , a vital strategic asset — not just for our economy , but for our security and defence . the conservatives fragmented british rail , which this government are now taking back into public control piece by piece . most relevant to today ’s debate , they privatised our water , not into a market of competing firms but into private monopolies , shielded from scrutiny and driven by dividends . in selling off the family silver , those governments wreaked havoc on our public services . to be generous to them , at least they had a vision , which is more than can be said about the last 14 years of the conservatives . for those 14 years , the conservatives were asleep at the wheel , and sadly for five of those years , the lib dems were snoring away quite happily in the passenger seat . while raw sewage poured into our rivers , the lib dems and the conservatives allowed cash to pour into the pockets of the wealthy through shareholder payouts and executive bonuses . while the environment agency cried out for resources , the conservatives and the lib dems cut its funding by half . that was into the river wye , the river etherow , the river noe , the river derwent and blackbrook , and equates to a sewage spill every five hours . that is a damning indictment of the failures of successive governments . as a consequence , just before the election , we in high peak saw sewage pumped into our rivers 1,653 times . by contrast , this labour government have passed the water ( special measures ) act , which introduced criminal liability for company executives who obstruct investigations . we have banned their bonuses , and we have given regulators the power to recover the costs of enforcement , ensuring that polluters , not taxpayers , foot the bill . we have mandated real - time public reporting of sewage spills . that is only the start . we know that wider reform is needed , and that is why we have launched the largest review of the water sector since privatisation . we know the size of the challenge to halt the decline , and we are the only party with a serious plan to do so . in west dorset , we are proud of our natural environment , but that pride is undermined by the relentless dumping of raw sewage into our waterways . in 2024 , there were 4,196 sewage spills in west dorset . across our rivers and coastlines , that added up to more than 48,000 hours of raw sewage discharge . in 2019 , just four of the 36 monitored water bodies in west dorset were rated as having a good ecological status . while that all happened , water company executives paid themselves £ 51 million in pay and bonuses , and it is our communities who pay the price . west dorset ’s economy relies heavily on tourism . in 2022 , tourism brought in more than £ 300 million to our local area , supporting more than 5,200 jobs . chichester harbour in my constituency is the largest recreational boating harbour in europe , but the damage being done to its ecosystem is stark . a recent study by the clean harbours partnership found 105 pharmaceuticals , pesticides and recreational drugs in the water , with the amounts going up 100 times directly after a sewage spill . does my hon . friend agree that tourism is incredibly important for areas such as his and mine , and that therefore we must have clean water ? i absolutely agree with my hon . friend . as i said , those 5,200 jobs in west dorset represent hundreds of families who depend on visitors choosing to come to lyme regis , west bay , burton bradstock , abbotsbury and any of the other numerous beautiful towns and villages that we have . how can those visitors do that with confidence when there is a real risk that they will arrive to find sewage warnings at the beach , and when residents and tourists alike have to check an app to see whether the water is safe to swim in ? in west dorset , we are lucky to have some of the uk ’s rare chalk streams . some have been mentioned already , and we have the river piddle , the river frome , wraxall brook and the west compton stream . they are home to delicate ecosystems and species such as the atlantic salmon , which is in worrying decline . as it stands , even when new homes are built near these rivers , water companies do not have to be formally consulted . making water companies statutory consultees on new housing developments is basic common sense . it would mean proper planning , proper accountability and the chance to avoid even more pressure on an already failing network . the liberal democrats have been clear : we want stronger rules and tougher enforcement , and we want water companies to take responsibility and reinvest in the communities they have neglected . we are calling for the introduction of the blue flag status for rivers and chalk streams , just as we have it for our best beaches . that would mean clear standards of cleanliness , proper testing and consequences when companies fall short . it would also help the public to understand when a river is clean and safe , and not just when it has been tested . we also welcome the speeding ticket fines that the government have introduced , with automatic penalties when water companies break the rules , but those fines need to be ringfenced to go straight back into the communities affected , such as in west dorset , to fix the infrastructure , restore habitats and protect the public . we need action , we need proper regulation and we need a government who will support rural communities . i thank the secretary of state for his opening remarks and the speed with which our government are implementing these vital changes . it is welcome to have an opportunity to speak again on an issue that matters to me and my constituents in north west leicestershire . sewage and pollution feature in many discussions on the doorstep , and this issue was the subject of one of my personal pledges to my community . it will continue to be so until the improvements from the water ( special measures ) act are felt . in my community , i regularly check in with those who have been adversely affected by sewage outflows , and i know how much it impacts on them day to day . i also know how long it has taken for some of the issues to be resolved . for example , a sewage - related case in my constituency recently ended with severn trent offering an enforcement undertaking and giving the trent rivers trust £ 600,000 . that will support the restoration of the habitat and the natural environment , but it took two years to reach an outcome from such a significant spill — which is not really surprising , because on the watch of the coalition government the environment agency ’s budget had been cut in half since 2010 , leaving the agency without the necessary tools and funding to fight the skyrocketing sewage discharges . my constituents are angry , and they have every right to be . i have said this before in the house , and i will say it again . in 2023 , sewage poured into our waterways in north west leicestershire for 15,000 hours — a 54 % increase on the previous year . what a legacy ; and still the liberal democrats voted against the water ( special measures ) act , which will provide the largest investment in water infrastructure in history , ban unfair bonuses to polluting water bosses , and help to clean up our rivers , lakes and seas . labour is the party that is fixing this mess . i was proud to serve on the committee considering the water ( special measures ) bill and even prouder to vote for the bill — and it is just the start . our government commissioned sir jon cunliffe to undertake a review of the water sector , and if members are quick , they can get their responses in by tonight . in a statement that he made after being asked to undertake the review , sir jon said that in his first job in the civil service , 45 years ago , he had worked on the issue of the industrial pollution of water , at a time when the uk was generally regarded as “ the dirty man of europe ” . i am a neighbour of my hon . friend . she will know that severn trent received an £ 18 million reward for the quality of its pr19 plan , but in its “ water quality report 2025 ” , surfers against sewage says that it failed to meet its targets every year in that period . despite that , it has been awarded £ 93 million for its pr24 plan . does my hon . friend agree that it is vital for severn trent , which serves both our constituencies , to be held to account properly in the pr24 period ? as my hon . friend says , severn trent serves both our communities , and yes , it must do its bit to clean up our waterways . i was a child of the 1980s , although i know my hon . friend can not believe that . i grew up by the seaside , and i remember the impact that our polluted seas had on our local community . i saw the changes that a clean - up made , but we are back to that place again , where families can not enjoy the seaside or the waterways . sadly , after 14 years our communities are devastated by the quality of their water . i was therefore proud to vote for a bill that would enable criminal charges to be made against persistent lawbreakers and introduce severe and automatic fines for offences . i was proud to vote for the independent monitoring of every outlet , ensuring that there would be an unprecedented level of transparency , so that the public could hold water company bosses to account . that is the difference that a labour government can make , and i will support our amendment . i am pleased to be able to bring the house ’s attention to my constituents ’ concern about the continuing discharge of raw sewage into our local seas and other bodies of water . in my constituency , we saw 529 such discharges in 2024 from just 14 storm overflow points . these incidents continued for a combined duration of over 6,200 hours . that is simply not acceptable . it poses a serious threat not only to public health and the environment but to our local tourism and marine economy , on which so many of my constituents depend . we must act decisively to improve our ageing water infrastructure , enforce stricter regulations and demand transparency from our water companies , from ofwat and from the environment agency . the hon . lady has mentioned ofwat . last august , it recommended penalties for four water companies amounting to £ 168 million , but so far it has not collected one penny . does she agree that ofwat needs to be scrapped ? i do not agree with the hon . gentleman ’s diagnosis , but i do agree that the fines need to be collected and distributed . the other issues that have been identified in my constituency — i imagine that they are wider issues , too — are illegal misconnections and cowboy builders , which we must crack down on . without addressing those issues , we will not get the results that we need , and constituents need to know what is being done to stop them . since being elected , i have had constructive engagement with southern water and the environment agency ’s local team and head office . having visited ford wastewater treatment works and done a shift with the misconnections team in bognor regis , i know that work is being done to upgrade the network , but this issue requires a strategic , cross - agency approach — one that considers the serious impact of the government ’s continued pursuit of house building on our floodplains on flood resilience and sewage discharges . when schools in my constituency are taking children to the beach and being told that they can not swim in the sea , it is not just disappointing ; it is disgraceful . it is not the legacy that we want to leave for the next generation — we owe them better . that brings us to the front - bench contributions . i am delighted to speak on the issue of how we can fix our broken water and sewerage sector , and get serious about cleaning up our rivers and lakes . i thank my hon . friend my constituency of witney , in west oxfordshire , has borne the brunt of the sewage scandal . many beautiful rivers flow through it , and the thames bisects it . we have the windrush and the evenlode , shell brook to the north , and the ock to the south . they are all heavily and frequently polluted . i welcome the calls from colleagues to introduce a new blue flag status so that we can guarantee that a river is clean enough to swim in . that would help to restore people ’s confidence in swimming , and the bathing place in witney would be a fantastic example . it is just north of early ’s mill , where generations of people have spent their summer swimming but no longer do so . we know what a car crash our sewerage network is , thanks to the many campaigners who have gone to so much trouble in their own time , and often using their own money , to bring this issue to our attention . at the top of the star is wasp — windrush against sewage pollution — which is run by professor peter hammond , ash smith , vaughan lewis and geoff tombs , who have worked tirelessly for the last five years to highlight what has gone wrong . i thank them and all the other citizen scientists in my constituency and beyond , who have done so much to bring this issue to national attention . we owe them all a huge debt of gratitude . i will focus on failures of regulation — specifically , ofwat ’s failures . ofwat is responsible for holding water companies accountable against the terms of their operating licences . defra has oversight of ofwat , sets the policy framework and provides strategic guidance to ofwat on key environmental and social policies . as many members have said , ofwat is clearly failing on pollution . the environment agency ’s own data shows that thames water discharged raw sewage for almost 300,000 hours in 2024 — up by almost 50 % on the 196,000 hours in 2023 . that is well known . ofwat is also failing to enforce financial viability . just like every other water company in the country , thames water , which serves my constituency , has to have two investment grade credit ratings , but it has not done so for nearly a year . it has been beaten with limp celery , but that is about it . it has £ 19 billion of debt and is quite possibly heading towards £ 23 billion of debt , and it has cash flows of just £ 1.2 billion . that obviously makes no financial sense , yet thames water is allowed to breach the rule with impunity . i have no doubt that other water companies , and companies in other sectors , take note of what thames water has been allowed to do and say , “ we , too , can cross that line in water and other regulated sectors . ” how is that good news ? it introduces a moral hazard that does enormous damage to our country . who is ultimately paying the cost of all this debt , and the enormous interest and advisory fees that go with it ? of course , it is the bill payers . ofwat fails to provide value for money . as per the water industry act 1991 , it has a statutory duty “ to protect the interests of consumers ” and “ to promote economy and efficiency ” on the part of water companies . as wasp ’s recently published note on water companies ’ capital project costs states , the costs that companies are proposing are extraordinary . in some cases , they are almost an order of magnitude higher than those in comparator companies in countries such as the usa and denmark . why is this , and why is it being allowed to happen ? why are our costs so much greater ? is it because our regulatory capital value pricing model is based on asset values , and therefore gives an incentive to water companies to boost their asset bases ? they do this through extraordinarily long depreciation periods for network assets such as pipes , which were installed 50 years ago , but somehow have depreciation periods of 100 years and are leaking like sieves . it also gives them an incentive to pour really expensive concrete . why is it that something built over here costs eight times the price in denmark ? why has , say , the oxford sewage treatment works gone from £ 40 million to more than £ 400 million in planned spend in the last four years ? what sort of inflation is that ? ofwat fails to provide fair pricing . water companies have a requirement to demonstrate fairness , transparency and affordability to customers , which , again , ofwat is supposed to uphold . water companies have been allowed to hike bills this year — in the case of thames water , by 31 % , although some of my constituents have come to me and said they have received increases of 50 % , 70 % or even more than 90%—and what are bill payers getting for that ? this is not fair when more than a quarter of the bills in thames water ’s case are just paying the interest — not paying down the debt , but just paying the interest . again , ofwat is continuing to allow the pockets of water company creditors to be lined at the expense of ordinary households . ofwat fails to be awake . it has a responsibility — bear with me on this one — for tracking who are the ultimate controllers of the water companies . that should be pretty simple ; there are not many of them . in thames water ’s case , it is taking wilful ignorance to an extreme of utterly determined ignorance . last may , thames water ’s largest shareholder , omers , wrote its stake in thames water down to zero and pulled its directors off the board . this has been widely reported in the press — it is not secret — yet i got a letter from ofwat last month confirming that it believes omers is still the ultimate controller of the company . why is ofwat ignoring this , and why does it matter ? being the ultimate controller of the company means it has certain responsibilities . those responsibilities are just being ignored , and ofwat , which is exactly what is supposed to be holding the company to account , is hiding under a stone somewhere . it needs to stop doing this . my hon . friend says that ofwat has failed to regulate the water system effectively , and is failing on environmental , public health and financial interests . in my constituency , wessex water leaked sewage for over 400,000 hours last year alone . does he agree that the water regulator should be replaced with a clean water authority , which would bring together the environmental and financial regulation of water companies ? i thank my hon . friend , and , yes , i absolutely do . ofwat is also failing to innovate . it appears to do little , if anything , to push companies to do this . this is so critical because , if we are going to increase capacity in sewage treatment works , there are many better ways of doing so . there is a host of new technologies out there from leak detection , pipeline monitoring and predictive maintenance equipment to trenchless pipe repair and pressure management technologies . yet i have heard from firms in my constituency that it is easier to sell sewer technology solutions in the us and europe than in the uk . this is where the issues of the dire state of water companies ’ finances and the sewage scandal intersect , because companies can not make basic repairs , let alone properly innovate and improve , when so much of their revenue is going straight out of the door in interest payments . the previous government have a lot to answer for . it was on their watch that dumping sewage in our rivers and lakes reached record levels , as water companies piled up billions in debt . all the while , bosses rewarded themselves with generous bonuses for mismanagement and failure on so many levels . many people who work so hard in those companies suffered under that mismanagement . there is only so much point in looking backwards . what i am appalled by is that the new government , who came into power with promises to get tough with the water companies and sort out the scandal , have so far shown themselves to be about as tough as ofwat . the water ( special measures ) act — by the way , i say to order . i would just like to suggest that the hon . gentleman bring his remarks to a close rather than give us some examples , because we want to hear from the minister . he has 30 seconds at most . i will make that three . thank you very much , and over to you . over to her . [ laughter . ] i call the minister . thank you so much , madam deputy speaker , and can i say that you are doing an incredibly awesome job in the chair ? i would like to thank — if i can call him this — my hon . friend , i welcome the engagement we have had from across the house on the independent water commission . as we have heard , the sewage spilling into our rivers , lakes and seas is a national disgrace . it is the result of years of under - investment by the conservatives . they left us with crumbling water infrastructure and a broken water system . instead of fixing our water system , they let water companies use customers ’ money to pay out unjustified bonuses to their polluting bosses and shareholders . we will never let that happen . this labour government are turning the tide on sewage once and for all . those are not just words . in this debate , we set out exactly how we will do that . within days of coming to office , we ringfenced money earmarked for investment in water infrastructure so it can not be diverted for bonuses or dividends . where the money is not spent , it will be returned to customers . the minister will remember that i recently raised with her the concerns of staffordshire wildlife trust regarding the fines issued to severn trent water in 2024 for its huge sewage leak in strongford in my constituency . does she agree with me that the water ( special measures ) act will make water companies pay for the damage they have caused , and that it is just the start of this government ’s work to clean up our waterways ? i thank my hon . friend for her intervention . she is quite right : the water ( special measures ) act is a landmark piece of legislation , but it is just the start of what we want to achieve . it will give ofwat new powers to ban unfair bonuses . it will introduce stricter penalties , including imprisonment . it will enable the regulator to impose automatic and severe fines for wrongdoing , and it will involve cost recovery and the mandatory reporting of emergency overflows . but , madam deputy speaker , we do not just want to give you that ; we are going to give you so much more — more and more . we are going to go even further with the independent water commission , because , as we heard from hon . members across the house , that is not the extent of the government ’s ambition . sir jon cunliffe is currently undertaking the biggest review of the water sector since privatisation . he will be making recommendations to deliver long - term benefits , restore water bodies to good health , provide a reliable and efficient supply of water in a changing climate , and , ultimately , serve both customers and the environment . the independent commission will look to reset the water industry and tackle systemic issues to fundamentally transform the sector . the recommendations will form the basis of further legislation — i am already anticipating the amendments from the liberal democrats — to attract the long - term investment to clean up our rivers , lakes and seas for good . in addition to such measures , ofwat has announced £ 104 billion of private sector investment in the water sector over the next five years to build and upgrade water infrastructure in every region of the country , cutting sewage spills , improving water quality and giving us a reliable future water supply . it will also create tens of thousands of jobs around the country , help us to build our 1.5 million homes , support major infrastructure projects and power new industries . this is regional economic growth in action — the cornerstone of our plan for change . i turn now to the contributions from my hon . friends . my hon . friend i thank my hon . friend my hon . friend i ’m right here ! oh , there she is . again , this is testing my eyesight — it is confusing me . i hope that the hon . lady has seen and welcomed the changes we are introducing around bathing waters and the definition of a bather , and how that definition could also people involved in water sports . that is something she might be interested in . will the minister give way ? i will not , only because i have just three minutes left . i thank my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend we have reset the water sector . we are stopping the sewage scandal and transforming the water industry from one of decline to one of opportunity . we are seizing the opportunity to restore national pride in our rivers , lakes and seas and to secure a reliable water future supply for all . we are delivering our plan for change to create a better future for our country . question put ( the house divided : ayes 77 , noes 302 . question accordingly negatived . question put forthwith ( the house divided : ayes 301 , noes 69 . question accordingly agreed to . the deputy speaker declared the main question , as amended , to be agreed to ( resolved , that this house recognises that the government inherited a broken water system , with record levels of sewage being pumped into waterways ; welcomes the government ’s rapid delivery of its promise to put water companies under tough special measures through the landmark water ( special measures ) act 2025 , which has introduced new powers to ban the payment of unfair bonuses to water bosses who fail to protect the environment and to bring tough criminal charges against them if they break the law ; supports the government ’s work to secure over £ 100 billion of private sector investment to upgrade the crumbling sewage infrastructure ; and backs the largest review of the water sector since privatisation , aimed at tackling inherited systemic issues in order to clean up uk rivers , lakes and seas for good . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . at prime minister ’s questions earlier , the leader of the opposition said that anas sarwar , the scottish labour leader “ was whipping his msps to get male rapists into women ’s prisons ” . that is categorically and utterly untrue . scottish labour msps repeatedly called for the scottish government to ensure the safety of women prisoners . please can you advise me how i can ensure that the leader of the opposition corrects the record and withdraws this disgraceful slur ? i thank the hon . member for giving notice of his point of order . he will know that members are responsible for the accuracy of their remarks in this chamber . he has none the less raised his concerns and i am sure they will have been heard on the opposition benches . if the leader of the opposition wishes to correct the record , there are mechanisms available for her to do so . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft fair dealing obligations ( pigs ) regulations 2025 , which were laid before this house on question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft legal aid , sentencing and punishment of offenders act 2012 ( legal aid : domestic abuse ) ( miscellaneous amendments ) order 2025 , which was laid before this house on question agreed to . further to my online petition , which received 1,594 signatures , i rise to present this paper petition on behalf of the residents of windsor . i thank everybody who signed my petition to save windsor post office , and in particular my constituent sue pendry for her help and campaigning on this issue . while progress on a franchising deal is promising , it is subject to government funding and may yet see the branch moved up to a mile away . windsor can not afford to lose this busy branch when the town centre already faces jacked - up parking charges , increased business taxes and , frankly , the poor state of the public realm . the petition states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to work with the post office to ensure that the peascod street branch of the post office in central windsor remains open . and the petitioners remain , etc . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of windsor , declares that the popular peascod street branch of the post office in central windsor has been earmarked for potential closure , which would take away vital mail , travel , driving , identity and money services from the town centre ; notes that this is at a time when the town centre faces multiple challenges , including increased car parking charges , the state of the public realm and increased business taxes ; and further notes that 1,402 people have signed an online petition on this matter . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to work with the post office to ensure that the peascod street branch of the post office in central windsor remains open . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p003063 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(martin mccluskey . ) pension funds hold not just financial value but moral weight . how we treat our pensioners , and how we invest in the future of the hard - working people of this country , says everything about the kind of society we are . i want to bring to the house ’s attention one of the most concerning injustices faced by thousands of former hsbc employees , particularly women : the use of an outdated , punitive policy known as pension clawback . i support the midland clawback campaign , which seeks justice for the 51,000 affected members of the midland bank pension scheme , now administered by hsbc , who were misled about the nature of their retirement income and are being short - changed as a result . unlike most other institutions , which phased out clawback in the 1980s , hsbc continues to enforce it in its most punitive form . clawback was originally introduced in 1948 to offset national insurance costs when the state pension was created . midland bank introduced clawback to its pension scheme in 1975 as a cost - saving measure . former employees were told that they would receive a defined - benefit pension at two thirds of their final salary , in addition to their state pension . instead , when they reached state pension age , hsbc began deducting a portion of their occupational pension , calling it a “ state deduction ” . i have a constituent who has worked for 44 years at midland bank and hsbc . they were promised a pension of two thirds of their final salary , but they now face a 16 % cut — that is over £ 1,700 per annum — because of the so - called state deduction . they were never told that the scheme was integrated , and even private pension reviews failed to explain it . does the hon . member agree that that lack of transparency is unacceptable and that workers like my constituent deserve answers ? i fully agree . the term itself is misleading . the money is not being taken by the state ; it actually goes back to hsbc . had it been labelled properly , as an integrated pension deduction , many people would have asked questions much earlier . i thank my hon . friend for securing the debate . sue , a constituent of mine , is trying to obtain her full hsbc pension , but because of a clawback deduction by her former employer that has no alignment with the salary she earned , she is losing out on £ 244 each month . that is unfair and has plunged many pensioners — primarily women — into poverty . does my hon . friend agree that the minister must seriously consider what support can be provided for people like sue , who have been left with significant financial difficulties ? absolutely . i will ask the minister to take action later in my remarks . my constituents phil and ann have contacted me about the so - called clawback policy , which would see them lose about £ 2,000 a year from their pensions when they reach state pension age . they , like many former employees , believe that this is an unfair and morally questionable approach . does the hon . lady agree that that can not be the right approach and that it must be reconsidered ? yes . the hon . member makes a good point . the lack of transparency allowed this policy to persist under the radar . the formula used is regressive and unfair . for a start , the deduction is based on the full state pension rate one year before retirement , not on salary or actual state pension received . it is then divided by 80 and multiplied by years worked . the result ? the longer someone worked and the less they earned , the more they lose . that injustice falls heaviest on women . former midland bank and hsbc workers who had a defined - benefit pension saw deductions from their pension entitlement at state pension age , to take account of the payment of the state pension . those deductions had no link to salary or pension received . lower - earning staff members , mostly women , were particularly affected , including my constituent angela blockwell . does the hon . member agree that that inequality must finally be recognised and that pension clawbacks must be abolished for all ? yes , the practice is a relic from the past and needs to be abolished . women have historically occupied lower - paid roles at midland bank and hsbc . they have taken career breaks to care for children or elderly parents , or have been placed on new contracts with clawback attached — often without being told the implications for their pension rights . hsbc claims that there is no discrimination because the policy applies to all , but indirect discrimination is defined as a policy that appears neutral but disproportionately harms a particular group . a female constituent of mine who has worked for hsbc uk for over 35 years has seen her pension reduced by approximately £ 850 a year because of a clawback clause that she was never properly informed about when she joined the bank ’s defined - benefit scheme . does the hon . member agree that hsbc needs to engage properly with the affected employees ? i thank the hon . member for that valuable point . i have a message for hsbc later in my remarks . campaigners have presented robust evidence , including research by the university of exeter , showing the disproportionate impact on women and low - paid staff . one of the recommendations in the university of exeter report is for policymakers — us — to consider the suitability of the equal pay provisions that have not been available to members of the post-1974 midland bank pension scheme , despite evidence of the disproportionate impact on women . when campaigners turned to the equality and human rights commission , the department for work and pensions and the government equalities office , they were passed from pillar to post . no one took responsibility ; no one acted . equality law does not cover pensions . let us not forget that hsbc ’s pension fund currently stands at £ 4.1 billion in surplus after liabilities , but the estimated cost of ending clawback is just £ 450 million . hsbc has the resources ; what it lacks is the will . my wellington constituent , mike , who is a former midland bank employee , has seen his pension go down in value by 13 % because of the failure of hsbc to honour its obligations . he tells me that the state — in other words , the taxpayer — will be making up some of his income as a result . given the level of profit that my hon . friend has revealed , is it not totally wrong that the taxpayer is bearing the burden of the obligation that the corporate giant should be paying itself ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . it is unfair and we need to ensure that hsbc is accountable . in correspondence with mps , the bank states that because clawback is lawful , its policy is acceptable , but i say : lawful does not mean just . this parliament has a duty to act when the law permits injustice . we need to modernise pension legislation to ensure that it reflects today ’s values of fairness , transparency and equality . after the waspi — women against state pension inequality — pension injustice , we must be alert to further pension scandals . i commend the hon . lady for securing the debate . the fact that there are so many hon . members in the chamber is an indication of the interest that she has created through her adjournment debate , so well done to her . there were an estimated 12.95 million state pensioners in great britain in 2024 - 25 . as the hon . lady has said , the waspi women have been hard done by because of government decisions made without consideration . there is an onus on all of us in this house to ensure that pension funds are profitable and sustainable . does the hon . lady agree that in tandem with enforcing work - based pensions , we must ensure that state pensions can catch up , so that there will still be such a thing as state pensions for the 40 - year - olds who are paying their national insurance today , believing that their state pension will be there for them when it comes to the time that they need it ? i thank the hon . member for raising that important issue . absolutely , we need to ensure that the government have a long - term outlook , so that the young working british people of today will be able to retire on a comfortable pension . we urgently need a full review of pension clawback practices . many constituents have written to me about other unfair pension schemes , including former police officers and people on occupational pensions that are not protected from inflation . i congratulate my hon . friend on securing the debate . terry , one of my constituents , worked for a large american multinational company . as a consequence of the pensions act 1995 , he found his pre-1997 pension contributions decoupled from inflation . because of the nature of inflation , his savings , which he now depends on , have been gradually eaten away and he finds himself in increasing levels of destitution . will the minister look at the issue with the seriousness that it requires ? it can not be right that pensioners in our country are suffering as a consequence of decisions made by multinational companies that remain hugely profitable . the issue has a particular geography because so many multinational companies were located in the south - east of england . i thank my hon . friend for making that important point . we need legal reform to ensure that pensions in payment are finally brought under the protection of equality law . we also need greater transparency and accountability from pension providers , especially those entrusted with the retirement futures of hard - working people . hsbc ’s clawback policy is discriminatory in its impact , misleading in its language and fundamentally unjust in its effect . i therefore urge the minister to bring forward legislation to put an end to this outdated practice and to finally stand up for those whose voices have gone unheard for far too long . clawback is just one part of a broken pension system ; we must also ask where our pension funds are invested and what future we are buying with that money . i am grateful to my hon . friend for laying out the case for change so well . she talks about the investments that pension funds are making . i worked for more than a decade in the investment industry , and many of my clients were big public pension funds . more recently , i served as a trustee of one of the largest public pension funds in the country . one of the things that pensioners contacted me about was where their money was going . they would ask , “ is it being used to fund fossil fuel extraction ? ” or “ is it being used to support some unsavoury regimes around the world ? ” does my hon . friend agree that pensioners should have more power to have a say over what goes on with their money ? i fully agree . it is really important that pensions reflect ethics and morality and that the people investing in them have a voice . it is no longer good enough to see pensions in isolation from sustainability , ethics or morality . whether it is because of the way in which funds are clawed back from low - paid pensioners or the way in which they are funnelled into destructive , high - emission industries , the system is crying out for reform . as we look ahead to cop30 , billions of pounds of local government pension schemes are still invested in fossil fuels and in industries that drive deforestation , biodiversity loss and wildlife extinction . if we are to build a just and sustainable future , we must build a just and sustainable pension system that protects not only people in retirement , but the planet and generations to come . everyone deserves a secure retirement . for many , their occupational pension is an essential part of that . having spent years paying into a pension scheme , it matters to all of us that they get a decent pension out . it must be decent in the sense of being adequate for their needs and decent in terms of providing the benefits that they were promised . i am pleased that i will respond in more general terms to the points that the hon . member for stratford - on - avon and others have raised . she raised the issue of integrated pension schemes , which are sometimes called clawback schemes . i appreciate that that type of scheme can be controversial , thanks to the change in the private pension income involved . all of us sympathise with anyone who expected a straightforward income increase when their state pension kicked in , only to find that things were much more complicated than that . i have read and listened to representations on this issue myself . as with all defined benefit schemes , integrated schemes are required to pay out the full value of the promised pensions to each member , as set out in their scheme rules . that provides certainty , security and a base on which savers can build their retirement plans . integrating an occupational pension scheme with the state pension was a core design of some schemes , and that has pros and cons . it used to be a common feature of final salary schemes , covering almost half of schemes , according to one survey from the early 2000s , although it is far less common today , partly for some of the reasons that the hon . lady set out . the original aim was to provide a smooth level of pension income throughout retirement that started before the state pension age was reached , with a higher amount of occupational pension paid before state pension age , followed by a reduction in the occupational pension when the member received their state pension . the amount of the reduction is required to be set out in the pension scheme rules , and it is therefore very important that the rules are clearly communicated to those involved , as my hon . friend while the aims of integrated pensions are clear , it would , of course , be a big shock to anyone to see their occupational pension reduced upon receiving the state pension if they had not expected it . it is therefore important for employees to understand the pension benefits they can get from their scheme , and the government place great weight on the importance of that clear communication , without which no one can plan properly for the future . all schemes are required by law to provide every member with basic information about the scheme , either before they join or very shortly afterwards . that includes an explanation of the contributions in the case of some of the schemes mentioned today , which were on the employer side only , but also how benefits were calculated — exactly the integrated clawback mechanisms we are talking about this evening . if savers have not received clear communication in the form required by law , they must have avenues of redress . they can bring a complaint to their scheme ’s internal dispute procedure , but if that does not resolve the issue , the pensions ombudsman is there to act . there have been some calls tonight for the government to compel the withdrawal of integration arrangements — those calls have been common for some time , and i have heard them . i recognise some of the arguments being made , but i owe it to this house to be clear that we can not retrospectively change the benefits schemes offered to their members . any legislative change would affect all integrated schemes , risking the future of some that are less well funded . however , i do want to engage with the question of pension fairness , which so many members from across the house have raised this evening . while the law is very clear that men and women must be treated equally within any scheme , i understand the points that have been raised about the effects of those scheme rules , which are felt very unequally indeed . the inequality of pensions more broadly is a big issue for society , particularly for women and lower earners over the years . i want to celebrate some progress that has been made , but also recognise how much more there is to do . on progress , the new state pension introduced after 2016 by the previous government has made a significant difference in closing the gap between the average amounts received weekly by men and by women , to equalise those amounts in practice . however , there is much more to do . the gender pension gap , for which the department for work and pensions now publishes figures the first time , is very large indeed . some of that reflects some of the historical issues we have been discussing , but it also reflects our labour market . women have lower employment rates , are much more likely to do part - time work , and are much more likely to be lower earners — for example , 3.9 % of women work in low - paid work as opposed to 2.8 % of men . those underlying structural inequalities then manifest as pension inequality , which is one of the reasons why it is so important that reform of the state pension has moved towards a more equal treatment of women and men . as for what the government are doing about pension inequality , we will shortly set out a timeline for phase 2 of our pensions review , focusing on adequacy and , in particular , addressing some of these very important questions . although people talk about pension adequacy on average across the whole population , it is very different for different groups , which is exactly why the pensions review will need to reflect on the questions raised . however , it also highlights the importance of some of the changes being brought through in the labour market by this government , including through the employment rights bill . that bill will disproportionately benefit women , who are more often lower earners . turning to the question of indexation , some schemes do provide indexation above the legal minimum on a discretionary basis . like both trustees and employers need to think carefully about the effect of inflation on members ’ benefits — that is especially true on the back of the exceptional inflation in recent years . pension scheme trustees , after all , have a fiduciary duty to scheme members — a duty they should apply when considering discretionary increases . that is directly relevant to recently announced reforms on the use of surpluses in defined benefit schemes , as several members have raised . those reforms will make it easier for individual schemes to make decisions that improve outcomes for sponsoring employers and members . that could include discretionary benefit increases , where trustees can consider the situation of those members who would benefit from such rises and whether the scheme has a history of making such payments . trustees will , in negotiation with the employer , be responsible for determining how members may benefit from any release of surplus . i thank members who have contributed this evening , in particular the hon . member for stratford - on - avon . we all benefit from the opportunity to address this important topic . as the minister for pensions , it is my priority to ensure that people who work hard can enjoy the retirement they are owed . that is what this government will always do . my hon . friend i thank the hon . member for the reminder to respond to that point . he will know that trustees already have a responsibility to invest in the interests of their members and that the law requires trustees of significant schemes — with more than 100 members — to set out a clear statement of their investment principles . it is important that we offer people secure retirements . that is the job of this government , it is my job as the pensions minister , and it is what our pensions review is focusing on doing . it is what this government will always do . question put and agreed to . house adjourned .