i am grateful for being able to contribute to this debate . it is a privilege to follow so many powerful speeches , and the speech delivered by my hon . friend i welcome the new secretary of state to his place , and thank him for the way in which he opened this debate . at the outset , i draw the house ’s attention to my background as an officer of the gmb union and my current unpaid role as chair of the gmb parliamentary group . in that capacity , i thank i wish to speak specifically against lords amendments 121 , 11 and 1 , and in support of the government amendments that seek to strike them out . before doing so , i want to say a few words about my hon . friend i believe that lords amendment 121 contains significant drafting weaknesses and would fundamentally alter the nature of the proposed and restored school support staff negotiating body . first , the amendment states that employers may introduce new terms and conditions of employment that “ meet or exceed any minimum standards set by the sssnb . ” in legal terms , however , the sssnb will not set or determine those standards ; it is a statutory forum for negotiation . the actual conditions of employment will be set through regulations drafted by the secretary of state and approved by parliament . secondly , the actual parameters of a future pay and grading structure will be negotiated by the relevant parties : the representatives of employers , and the representatives of employees . that was the spirit of the original 2008 act and the actual operation of the sssnb in its original incarnation . given my experience as a former trade union officer representing school support staff , i know the contractual issues that need to be addressed are so complicated that they can not be satisfactorily resolved on the floor of the house . that complexity is a result of 14 years of drift , dither and political disinterest in the 800,000 support staff workers in england who keep our schools going , and it is a damning indictment of the decision to cancel the original sssnb . finally , lords amendment 121 risks creating confusion at a local level . the amendment states that employers must not be restricted from introducing “ improved terms and conditions ” , but changes to contracts are not merely introduced ; they are consulted on and agreed , either individually or collectively , under existing statutes . the effect of the somewhat loose wording in the amendment may be to encourage local attempts to make unilateral variations to contracts and terms and conditions . members who support this amendment might say that only improvements could be made under it , but both “ improvement ” and “ detriment ” are subjective terms . they are in the eye of the beholder , and i believe that if the amendment were to be carried through , the actual effect may be to increase the number of court cases concerning school support staff . i urge the opposition not to push a point , and to reconsider their wider opposition to the school support staff negotiating body . school support staff undertake essential roles , and they deserve the same professional standards and professional respect that is afforded to teachers . that is what the restoration of the school support staff negotiating body will achieve . we have debated the official opposition ’s amendments many times at various stages , but i want to comment on some of the lords amendments that stand in the names of liberal democrat peers , either in whole or in part . when i entered this chamber at the start of the debate , i did not presume that those amendments necessarily enjoyed the support of the liberal democrat front benchers in the commons , but i am afraid that impression was dispelled by the contribution from the liberal democrat spokesperson , i am at a loss to understand how the radical change in approach has come about among the liberal democrats in this house between committee stage , report , third reading and the debate that we are holding today . in fact , listening to the hon . lady , i felt an uncomfortable sense of déjà vu : it was like watching the rose garden press conference all over again . after all , her front - bench colleagues — the hon . members for chippenham ( sarah gibson ) and for torbay ( steve darling)—were at all times appropriately critical in committee , but they were essentially supportive of the principle of enhancing workers ’ rights . lords amendment 11 , which was originally a conservative amendment in the commons but now stands in the name of a liberal democrat peer , was not supported by the liberal democrats in committee . lords amendment 1 , which stands in the names of both liberal democrat and conservative peers , seeks to amend clause 1 . however , the liberal democrats supported that clause in committee and only voiced concern , which was reasonable , that timely guidance to employers must be issued to accompany it ; indeed , they voted with labour members when it was put to a vote in committee . i fear that this amendment , too , could have serious unintended consequences . the clause that it seeks to amend puts a duty on employers to offer regular - hours contracts to “ workers”—that is the language used in the legislation as it stands at the moment — but the amendment seeks to convert that duty into a right to request by employees . “ employees ” is , of course , a more restrictive category than “ workers ” ; indeed , clause 148 of the bill as drafted makes it clear that for the purpose of the interpretation of this bill , “ workers ” and “ employees ” mean two different things . many of the people who are classed only as “ workers ” are precisely those who may benefit the most from these protections . some 5 million people who are nominally casual workers in sectors such as social care , construction , hospitality , security and retail could be excluded from these protections if the amendment , which stands in the names of conservative and liberal democrat peers , were to be carried . i hope it is not the intention of those on the conservative benches to exclude those 5 million people . at the start of this debate , i could not believe that that was the intention of the liberal democrats , but now i am not so sure . the secretary of state was asked — what discussions she has had with the mayor of london on the closure of front counters at police stations . it is clear to us that visible policing is essential to restoring public confidence in our police , which is why there will be 3,000 more neighbourhood police on the beat by april next year under this labour government . the metropolitan police will receive up to £ 3.8 billion in 2025 - 26 , a £ 262 million increase in funding through the settlement . may i , as a london member , begin by paying tribute to the brave police officers from the met and many other forces who were policing protests on saturday , a number of whom were injured in the line of duty as a result of abhorrent attacks ? i am sure that the thoughts and prayers of all members , in all parts of the house , are with them . last week we discovered that sadiq khan , the mayor of london , had admitted that he had known as long ago as november that the met planned to close a number of police front counters across london , having promised just six months earlier in his election manifesto that not a single borough would be left without a police front counter . the decision to close twickenham ’s counter means that richmond upon thames will be left without one . does the minister agree that , given the importance of police counters in maintaining trust in and accessibility to our police , this decision needs to be reversed ? does she also agree that the mayor of london has broken his promises , and that the metropolitan police should be funded properly ? may i associate myself with the comments made by the hon . member at the start of her question ? as she would expect , we have been in close contact with the met throughout the weekend . our thoughts are with the officers who were injured , some of them seriously , and we must of course ensure that justice is done for them : they run into danger for us every day . it is clear to me that the mayor of london is making the right decisions on policing across london . of course members will feel that their particular police stations are important , and of course visible policing is important . what our communities are saying — what my communities in croydon are saying to me — is that they want to see police on our streets tackling crime , not sitting behind desks doing the jobs that unwarranted police officers could be doing , and that is why we are putting neighbourhood policing at the heart of our policies and putting those 3,000 officers back on our streets by april next year . a constituent of mine tried to act as a good samaritan by handing in a handbag that they had found in the town centre , but they could not do so because hemel hempstead police station ’s front desk had been closed under the last government . they were told that they would have to travel to hatfield police station , which is half an hour away . does the minister — i welcome her to her place — agree that the hemel hempstead front desk should be reopened so that the police can be even more accessible to our constituents ? order . i am not sure that the minister has responsibility for matters such as this . i am of course happy to talk to my hon . friend about the situation in his local community so we can ensure that the police are doing all they can to tackle all the crimes that were not considered a priority under the last government , from antisocial behaviour to low - level threat . that is extremely important to our communities . i call the shadow minister . let me begin by welcoming the new ministers to their places . the last conservative government recruited a record number of police officers , but earlier this year we discovered that despite labour ’s promise of more police , the headcount had already fallen by 1,316 since it came to office . both the national police chiefs ’ council and the metropolitan police commissioner have warned that we will lose even more officers . when will the minister restore police numbers to the levels they were at under the last conservative government ? i thank my opposite number for his welcome . let me also use this opportunity to thank the minister of state , department for work and pensions , my right hon . friend under the last couple of years of the conservative government , shoplifting soared : we saw a 70 % increase . street theft rose by 60 % in two years , and the conservatives ignored antisocial behaviour . violence and abuse against shop workers was at epidemic levels , and the yo - yoing of the police numbers did not help ; the hon . gentleman may remember that the conservatives cut them by 20,000 . we are prioritising neighbourhood policing . we will ensure that the police have the resources that they need , and we will use new technology to ensure that we are tackling crime as much as we can . those 3,000 neighbourhood police officers will be in place by next year , and the 13,000 police officers that we have pledged in our manifesto will make a real difference to people ’s lives . may i gently say that the question is about the mayor of london and police closures ? we have allowed a little bit of leeway . let us see how we go from here and try to stick to the questions before us . what assessment she has made of the potential implications for her department 's policies of the approval under the animals ( scientific procedures ) act 1986 between april and june 2025 of the use of 1,656,930 animals over the next five years . the department takes its responsibilities under the animals ( scientific procedures ) act extremely seriously . approvals for the use of animals in science are given only when no alternatives exist and where the scientific benefit justifies the potential harm . the government will soon publish a strategy on how we will work towards phasing out the use of animals in science . more than 1.6 million animals have been approved for testing over the next five years , including through licences for invasive brain research on monkeys and for looking at different methods of killing animals in laboratories . labour ’s manifesto committed to phasing out animal testing . can the minister reassure me that the non - animal methods strategy will commit to herbie ’s law and provide a clear framework for phasing out animal experiments within the next decade ? i am grateful to the hon . member . herbie ’s law is a proposed legislative framework to phase out animal experiments , specifically in medical research , in the uk by 2035 . the government ’s commitment is clear : we will partner with scientists , industry and civil society to work towards a long - term goal of phasing out the use of animals in scientific research and testing . i will ensure that he receives a letter from the relevant minister . i thank the minister for his answer . it is quite clear that people have had their lives saved through scientific experiments with animals , and we thank the scientists for that . at the same time , a growing number of people have grave concerns , including my constituents and probably the minister ’s constituents as well . can he assure us that when it comes to doing animal experiments of any sort , the priority will always be the people who can be saved as a result of the experiments , but it will also be the care of the animals ? that is what my people want , and i think it is what everybody wants . i can give the hon . gentleman that assurance . the government authorise the use of animals in science under the animals ( scientific procedures ) act 1986 in order to support critical national objectives in public health , scientific innovation and environmental protection . the authorisations provided by the regulator are not a blanket approval , but a tightly regulated process that has rigorous and robust ethical , legal and scientific scrutiny . what steps she is taking to help prevent migrants from crossing the english channel illegally . under this government , the national crime agency has led 347 disruptions of immigration crime networks — its highest level on record , and a 40 % increase on the previous year . we are passing legislation to give both the national crime agency and law enforcement more powers to arrest those suspected of facilitating people smuggling at a much earlier stage . i was very sorry to see that the hon . member did not match his rhetoric with real action by voting for those measures when they were before the house . i have it on good authority that the people smugglers in northern europe are absolutely delighted with labour ’s new front - bench team , and especially with the promotion of i think the hon . member has just admitted to having a hotline to a bunch of people smugglers . perhaps he would like to contact the national crime agency and tell it that he is in touch with a bunch of criminals , so that they can be appropriately dealt with . all he and his party have is a bunch of rhetoric and no answers to the problems that the previous government left behind . it is this government who will clean up the mess and secure our borders . illegal immigration is , by definition , an international crime . that is why it is so important that we work with our allies , such as france , in targeting this issue , which affects our communities . i welcome the government ’s “ one in , one out ” deal with france , which has the potential to be the most game - changing step in british migration policy in decades . can the minister give us an update on how the “ one in , one out ” deal is going , and has she spoken to her counterparts in france in her new role ? my hon . friend is absolutely right that international co - operation is the key to us securing our borders here at home and assisting our international partners to do the same with theirs . i am already in touch with my french counterparts . that was a landmark agreement , which the conservatives tried to achieve for many years , but they were all words and no action . it is this government who struck that landmark deal , and we are working with our partners in france to get the first flights off the ground as soon as possible . i congratulate the right hon . lady on her appointment and i wish her every success . it is in the national interest and the national security interest that this issue is tackled , but her front - bench colleagues and the prime minister are absolutely wrong to get rid of a deterrent . notwithstanding all the new policies , all the new bills , and all the new relabelling and rebadging of organisations , unless there is a deterrent the illegal migrants will continue to cross the channel , as they have done since this government came to power . when is a deterrent going to be put in place , and what will it look like ? i welcome the tone of the first part of the right hon . gentleman ’s question . it is in our collective national interest that we secure our borders , and i look forward to working with members from across the house as we get on with that important task . it is important not just to prevent criminality , but to hold our own country together , which is why i have always said i will do whatever it takes . the rwanda agreement , which is what the right hon . gentleman referred to as a deterrent , was nothing of the sort . from the day that agreement was signed to the day it was cancelled , 84,000 people crossed into this country . that shows it was not a deterrent that was ever going to work . i am clear that i will do whatever it takes . i am already considering other measures that will deter people from making that crossing in the first place , and i will update the house in due course . immigration is still a big issue for my constituents — they email about it and it comes up when i am in the pub — but people ’s frustration is turning to direct action , and northampton is now filled with flags . does the home secretary agree that flags are a symbol of our pride in our country , and they should not be hijacked by plastic patriots and those who do not work in our country ’s interest ? let me be very clear : i understand the strength of feeling across communities in this country about the use of hotels , in particular — the right to protest is an ancient right in this country , and we will protect it — but it is important that we do not slip into rhetoric that incites violence or hatred towards other communities . i love the st george ’s flag and i love the union jack . those flags belong to me as much as they do to anybody else , and we must never allow any of our flags to become symbols of division . i call the shadow minister . lots of people know that under this government , the number of people arriving illegally has hit a record high . what many do not know is that this labour government are repealing the power to scientifically test the age of those arriving and are hiding the data on the number making false claims about their age . why are the government doing away with powers that could prevent adult migrants from getting into classrooms with children , and why are they hiding this data from the british people ? coming from one of the conservative members who , frankly , did nothing across their period in office and who are responsible for the mess i am having to clear up , i think that is a little bit rich . this government have been absolutely transparent . we will carry on being so , and we will publish all the relevant data at the appropriate time . i am very clear that nobody who tries to game our system will get away with it . we will strengthen our rules , rather than weaken them , which is what we saw under the conservative party . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . many of those who come to this country by crossing the channel go on to be granted refugee status . earlier this month , the government backtracked on their promise to continue with the 56 - day move - on period for those granted refugee status , barely weeks after a home office minister assured this house that the policy would last until the end of the year . the move - on period extension was working , in that it was giving refugees time to secure work and housing while shielding local councils from sudden surges in homelessness caused by people being forced out of asylum accommodation too quickly . halving the move - on period is worse for refugees who want to support themselves , worse for the communities supporting them until they can get on their feet and certainly worse for already stretched council budgets . does the home secretary agree that it is better to do what works , both for refugees and for communities welcoming them , and will she look again at reinstating a policy that worked , rather than chasing headlines ? i say to the hon . lady that we are following what is working . rather than having an arbitrary time period , we are working with local authorities to make sure we have the appropriate move - on period . it is in nobody ’s interest that people remain in hotels for longer than is absolutely necessary , and of course this government will end the use of asylum hotels . what recent progress her department has made on improving neighbourhood policing . what recent progress her department has made on improving neighbourhood policing . what recent progress her department has made on improving neighbourhood policing . what steps she is taking to help ensure the delivery of effective community policing . what recent progress her department has made on improving neighbourhood policing . every day the police make us safer , but the public are rightly concerned that there are crimes that blight their communities and too often go unpunished . we are focusing police on the crimes that matter to local communities . we have delivered the neighbourhood policing guarantee , including a dedicated named officer in each neighbourhood , guaranteed response times and 3,000 more officers by april 2026 . the devon - based devon and cornwall police and crime commissioner announced months ago , with great fanfare , that camborne in my constituency would be a focus for her . there has been very little evidence of that increased focus since . she also said that redruth would not be a focus because it was not a business improvement district . neighbourhood policing performance in the towns of camborne , redruth and hayle are inextricably linked . will the home secretary meet me and cornish colleagues to discuss neighbourhood policing across cornwall ? i am very sorry to hear about those issues with the police and crime commissioner in my hon . friend ’s local area . it is important that those concerns are listened to . i would be very happy for him to meet the minister for policing and crime , my hon . friend i welcome the action the government are taking to strengthen neighbourhood policing in wolverhampton , with 27 additional roles and officers newly allocated or moved back into neighbourhood roles . fourteen years of cuts have left west midlands police with around 700 fewer officers than in 2010 and a funding formula that short - changes our region by £ 40 million every year . will my right hon . friend commit to reviewing the tories ’ funding formula so my constituency can have the same level of neighbourhood policing and security as other parts of the country ? as a fellow west midlands member of parliament , i of course hear my hon . friend ’s concerns , but she will understand that , as with previous years , decisions on police force funding allocations will be made via the police funding settlement , which is taking place later in the year . i commend the government for their commitment to neighbourhood policing , not least the proposed powers in the crime and policing bill that will empower officers to stop antisocial and illegal e - scooter riding , which has been a dangerous blight across stevenage town centre . however , does my right hon . friend not agree that we should be giving police the legislation and guidance they need to keep our local neighbourhoods safe , rather than arresting individuals for posting on social media views that , while considered offensive by some , are nowhere near the bar for inciting criminal behaviour ? on the first part of my hon . friend ’s question , he is absolutely right about strengthening neighbourhood policing to deal with the concerns he raises . that is why we have brought forward new powers in the crime and policing bill . i agree that it is important that the line between that which is perfectly legal fair comment , even if offensive , and that which is illegal is maintained as strongly as possible . i have already had conversations with senior police officers on this matter , and i am pleased to see statements from , for example , the chief of the met police . i will be meeting them in more detail to make sure that that line is not crossed , so we can maintain confidence in our police . the prime minister promised there would be a summer blitz on antisocial behaviour , with more funding and more community police officers promised for our constituencies , yet this summer in cheadle village we have seen even more antisocial behaviour in the community . throughout the summer i was contacted by residents about crime in the area , including police officers attacked , a local school broken into and neighbours threatened for simply asking gangs not to throw rocks at their houses . one of my constituents , adam , told me it is the worst he has ever seen it . why did the summer blitz on antisocial behaviour not include cheadle ? more than 500 town centres across england and wales have seen the benefits of that summer initiative . i will ask my officials questions about the hon . gentleman ’s area in particular , but it is an important model that we have trialled this year . we look forward to building on it as we ensure we have the local responses and neighbourhood policing to deal with local concerns , building confidence so that people can enjoy our town centres as they used to do . i welcome the government ’s commitment to the neighbourhood policing guarantee to restore bobbies on the beat in our town centres , following 14 years of conservative cuts that have left our towns and villages at the mercy of shoplifters and antisocial behaviour . will the home secretary outline how lancashire , and in particular my constituency of blackpool north and fleetwood , will benefit from that guarantee ? the neighbourhood policing guarantee is absolutely critical to dealing with the issues that my hon . friend raises and to raising confidence more generally . the guarantee will ensure that all areas , including her constituency , will have a named , dedicated officer , guaranteed patrols and reliable response times , and will give communities absolute clarity about local policing priorities . how can persistent shoplifters be deterred if short sentences are abolished ? the right hon . gentleman is asking me a question relating to my previous brief , but he will be pleased to know that i expect the new justice secretary and lord chancellor to set out proposals for dealing with prolific shoplifters in particular , based on some of the conversations and exchanges he and i have had . i know it is a big problem , but the government will have a response to tackle the scourge of prolific shoplifting . i was contacted by constituents yesterday from the pound street mosque and riverside community centre mosque who had heard comments from the unite the kingdom rally about islam not being welcome in this country or in europe . how can neighbourhood policing help to reassure my constituents and the 3.9 million practising muslims in this country that they have the right to practise their faith without fear ? freedom of conscience , religion and belief is a protected freedom in this country ; it is part of the rights and responsibilities that we have as citizens of this great nation , and nothing should get in the way of that . freedom of speech is also protected in this country . there will always be some crossover between those freedoms , but , as i said in answer to a previous question , i am absolutely clear that there is a line between content that is offensive , rude or ill - mannered and incitement , whether to violence or hatred , which is a crime . it is important that we police the line between those types of comments effectively so that everybody in this country can have confidence in our policing system , as well as confidence in exercising their rights under the law of our land . last week was rural crime action week . i recently had an opportunity to join cambridgeshire constabulary ’s rural crime action team to see the work that it does , despite having to cover a huge county of eight constituencies with just 14 officers . those officers have recently been reallocated from being designated operational support unit officers to neighbourhood policing officers , thus bolstering the number of officers the government will classify as neighbourhood police and helping them to reach the target of 3,000 officers . however , those officers are neither new nor dedicated neighbourhood police . can the home secretary explain why she is artificially inflating neighbourhood policing numbers by reclassifying those in specialist roles ? the government ’s policy position is to ensure that the policing resource that we have focuses on neighbourhood policing , because we know that visible neighbourhood policing increases the confidence that communities have in going about their business and helps us to take back our town centres from those who indulge in low - level criminality — which is not low level , because it harms people and their confidence in their own communities . that is why we make no secret and are not ashamed of our neighbourhood policing guarantee . very simple question : why are police numbers coming down under a labour government ? this government are focusing on delivering neighbourhood policing . we are going to have 3,000 neighbourhood police officers by april 2026 , with 13,000 — as we committed in our manifesto — by the end of the parliament . what steps her department is taking to support ukrainian nationals with their visa applications . i call the minister — welcome . this government remain committed to supporting ukraine following russia ’s vile , illegal invasion . i acknowledge the warmth and generosity shown by so many local communities in supporting ukrainians in the uk . since the conflict began , more than 300,000 ukrainians have been offered temporary sanctuary through the dedicated ukraine schemes . ukrainians can still apply to the homes for ukraine scheme with a uk sponsor and , once here , extend their stay to a total of 3.5 years , as recently announced . i start by congratulating the minister and welcoming him to his place . my constituent lesley has been hosting and supporting a ukrainian refugee , ella , who , after months of delay and difficulty , has thankfully now received a visa extension . ella ’s case highlights the wider problems in the system : long waits , radio silence and a lack of communication , causing huge distress for the refugees and their hosts . can the minister set out first what is being done to improve the visa application system generally , and secondly whether the government will consider looking again at allowing ukrainian refugees who do not want to , or can not , return to ukraine the pathway and the chance of applying for indefinite leave to remain ? i thank my hon . friend for her congratulations and her hard work in this area . the uk government have been clear from the outset that the ukraine schemes are temporary and do not offer a direct route to settlement . the ukraine permission extension scheme reflects our strong humanitarian commitment while also — this is important — respecting ukraine ’s wish for its citizens to return , when safe , to support national recovery . the long - term position is under active consideration , and further details will be provided at the earliest opportunity . what steps her department is taking to help tackle crime in city centres . the united kingdom boasts a fantastic array of cities , each of which has a unique character and appeal . in order to thrive , our city centres must be safe . that is why this government are putting policing back on the beat and bringing in stronger powers to crack down on shop theft and antisocial behaviour . i was pleased to see newport city council announce last week £ 300,000 for new cctv in our city centre , and i commend the work of trading standards , whose efforts have seized almost £ 2 million of illegal cigarettes and vapes . while trading standards and the police are working really hard to tackle this issue , the time - limited nature of shop closure orders means that the shops often quickly reopen . what more can the government do to strengthen powers to stop this ? i welcome the actions in newport city ; it is good to hear . the tobacco and vapes bill will strengthen enforcement and crack down on rogue retailers , and a raft of other measures in the bill will crack down on these pernicious crimes . i look forward to talking more with my hon . friend about this . sometimes crime wears a suit , as happened in brechin in my constituency , where mackie motors had equity in their vehicles stolen by a french bank based in london . then , through mendacity or incompetence or both , the bank turned off the oxygen for that business of 50 years . i have met with home office and treasury ministers to try to get around this . my constituent has been to the financial conduct authority , who told them to go to the police , who then told them to go back to the fca , who then told them to go to citizens advice — you could not make this cluster - fankle up . is it not the case that in the uk today , if a small or medium - sized enterprise is in dispute with a bank , the fca will demonstrate that it is neither use nor ornament ? i can not comment on the specific details , as i am not aware of that case , but i am very happy to have a conversation with the hon . member . some smes in my constituency have had similar issues , so i am very happy to take that forward . what recent progress her department has made on tackling antisocial behaviour . what recent progress her department has made on tackling antisocial behaviour . what recent progress her department has made on tackling antisocial behaviour . antisocial behaviour causes untold distress and misery across our communities . under the previous government , the response to this menace was weak and ineffective , and visible neighbourhood policing declined dramatically . this government are putting that right by rebuilding neighbourhood policing and introducing respect orders to tackle persistent perpetrators and stronger powers to seize dangerous and deafening off - road bikes . i thank the almost 500 constituents who responded to my summer road safety campaign . one of the top issues raised is the use of antisocial off - road bikes . i warmly welcome new measures in the crime and policing bill to allow the police to seize these bikes without warning . will my hon . friend also look at the sale of off - road bikes to see what can be done to restrict them at source ? i think the number of constituents who responded to my hon . friend ’s survey shows that this is really important for our communities and something that we have to get a grip of . there has been a worrying increase in such crimes . as part of our safer streets mission , this government are cracking down on the crimes that make people feel unsafe in our communities , including snatch , theft , pickpocketing and robbery . our safer streets initiative has been running this summer in town centres , including in my hon . friend ’s constituency , i think . we aim to prevent crime and antisocial behaviour , and the sale of off - road bikes is at the heart of that . in wrexham , north wales police is doing very important work to tackle persistent antisocial behaviour and low - level crime , but local people are , quite rightly , seeking further reassurance that these issues will continue to be dealt with and tackled head on . will the minister please update the house on how police recruitment and training is progressing in north wales and beyond so that communities like mine can feel safe and secure in the place they call home ? as part of our commitment to restore neighbourhood policing , the neighbourhood policing programme career pathway developed by the college of policing is creating a structured training pathway to professionalise neighbourhood policing , benefiting communities across england and wales , including in wrexham . in terms of recruitment , north wales police has been allocated just over £ 2 million to support its projected neighbourhood policing growth over 2025 - 26 , which is made up of 26 additional police officers and 15 police community support officers . in gloucester , thanks to the government investing £ 1 million in neighbourhood policing and a further £ 1 million in its safer streets initiative , we have seen more police on our streets this summer , leading to an increase in arrests and seizures of illegal e - bikes and vapes . some of that funding is to come to an end this autumn . will the minister please update me on how she will ensure that gloucestershire constabulary builds on the great work it has done this summer to make gloucester a safer place to live and work ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . it is encouraging to see the work going on in his constituency . it is our intention to ensure that the police have the resources they need to do the jobs we need them to do , whether in hotspot policing , neighbourhood policing or tackling anti - social behaviour . we will change legislation here in parliament to ensure they have the powers as well as the resources they need to act locally in the interests of our constituents . local youth provision goes hand in hand with a decrease in antisocial behaviour committed by young people , with even something as simple as a ping - pong table in a closed shop able to make a difference in a community . will the minister outline what work she is doing with the department for education and the treasury to ensure that we solve this problem once and for all and we do not just move it on and move people around the place ? the hon . gentleman is absolutely right : if we want to ensure that people are not getting into crime , we need to ensure they have activities and things to do . we are working closely with both the department for education and the department for culture , media and sport to ensure we have a programme of activities for our young people that gives them things to do and a purpose in life , including mentoring and support so that they can take the right path . residents of long hanborough in my constituency have described to me a summer of misery characterised by antisocial behaviour in the local playing field . i understand that the local rural policing constabulary does not have sufficient vehicles for all its officers to be out at any one time . is the minister satisfied that thames valley police has sufficient resources in its rural community policing forces to deal with antisocial behaviour in our villages ? antisocial behaviour is pernicious wherever it happens . of course , we need to ensure that the police have the right resources . as the home secretary said , police allocation decisions will be made in the autumn , but i am happy to have a conversation with the hon . member about the particular issues he is facing in his constituency to ensure that , when it comes to issues such as police cars and vehicles , we are making the most of taxpayers ’ money and making as many efficiencies as we can on that front . in line with the comments made by my hon . friend i am happy to take that question on board . i have spoken to the heads of all the violence reduction units across the country today , and it is clear that some of the most important work they can do is in partnership with other agencies and other bodies , whether in education , our youth services or others . we need to pull the resources we have together , use what works and follow the evidence . what steps she is taking to help reduce levels of bureaucracy for frontline police officers . the government are committed to tackling bureaucracy and are investing tens of millions of pounds this year in technology to get officers on to the frontline . that includes working with police to reduce admin , using tools such as automated redaction and artificial intelligence , and deploying cutting - edge technology such as facial recognition and video response to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of policing . i recently met the chief constable of leicestershire , and he explained some of the red tape that his force faces . between april 2024 and march 2025 , it used 14,769 “ use of force ” forms . these are for when people go into handcuffs . some 6,500 of those were for people who were complicit and were happy to be handcuffed . each time that happens , it takes an average of 23 minutes to fill in one of those forms . if that could be taken away , it would save the force about £ 50,000 . will the minister look at this , and will she meet me to discuss some of the other red tape that we could remove to make policing much more streamlined ? we need to ensure that the police are doing what we need them to be doing , and that they are out on the streets solving crime and not tied up in red tape . that is absolutely certain . the way to be tough on crime is to be smart on crime , and i am happy to look at the hon . gentleman ’s suggestions . i recently met a police officer in cambridgeshire who told me that that force had a policy requiring all footage from stop and searches to be reviewed by a more senior officer . due to this , they feel discouraged from doing proactive patrols due to the extra work that it adds for already stretched supervisors . will the policing minister write to cambridgeshire ’s conservative police and crime commissioner and urge him to be more proactive on challenging these issues so that our frontline police can spend as much time as possible out in our communities ? i am sorry that my hon . friend ’s police and crime commissioner is not doing what is needed . we need to empower the police to be out doing what they do best , not creating barriers for them to do so . what steps her department is taking to help tackle shoplifting . shop theft hit a record high in the last year of the previous government , but our crime and policing bill will remove the effective immunity for shop thefts under £ 200 . we are investing over £ 7 million to support police efforts against retail crime over the next three years , including supporting a specialist team to target organised gangs and offenders . we also back the tackling retail crime together strategy , in which industry and police are collaborating to better target perpetrators . as a proud member of the union of shop , distributive and allied workers and formerly the youngest deputy store manager for halford ’s in the east of england , i know at first hand the fear that shoplifting causes to retail workers . what action is my hon . friend taking to ensure that the police have the powers they need to use the full force of the law to tackle those who steal from our shops ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . every member of parliament hears about this issue , and knows how distressing it is . the intimidation of shop workers must stop , and the thieves who target shops and are stealing to order must be targeted . we are repealing the legislation that makes shop theft of and below £ 200 a summary - only offence , which will send a clear message that we will not tolerate this crime . recently , a. c. models in my constituency was targeted by a series of thefts that cost the owners , annette and clive , thousands of pounds , yet the shoplifter was ordered to pay them just £ 240 in compensation . with retail losses due to theft at record highs , what measures are the government taking to support small businesses that are preyed on by shoplifters ? we need to protect retail workers , and we need to do more to tackle shop theft . as i have just outlined , we are doing just that . i am very sorry that the hon . lady ’s constituents have had to suffer this terrible crime . we need to ensure that the message is loud and clear that we will not accept it . what assessment her department has made of the potential merits of disapplying the human rights act 1998 to immigration matters . clearly the balance between the human rights of illegal migrants and the wider public interest is out of kilter . this government will legislate to limit the application of article 8 of the european convention on human rights , which covers the right to a family life . this will mean that we can deport and remove more illegal migrants , and we will pursue international reform , too . in my previous role , i was already involved in conversations with other member states of the council of europe , and this government will continue that work . i welcome the home secretary to her position . every new appointment comes with an opportunity to take a fresh look at these matters . clearly , since the 1950s , when the refugee convention and the european convention on human rights were first written , the world has changed significantly . successive governments have tweaked various bits , working with partners , but does she agree that if we are to stop the small boats that are crossing the channel and illegal migration , the government will need a more wholesale change ? i hope the hon . gentleman will take a bit of time to look at the speech i made to the council of europe just before the summer recess , in which i made a very similar argument to the one he is making . for those of us who are supporters of the convention and who want to see it stand the test of time , we have to recognise that it is a treaty formed many decades ago in a different reality and we should have a conversation about whether it is still fit for purpose . it is a conversation that others in europe are having , and we are taking a leading role in those discussions . we will pursue international reform and also reform of our domestic legislation . by leaving the eu , the tories tore up our returns agreement with the eu , and they completely failed to negotiate a new one , but this government have now rectified that . does the home secretary agree that the tories and reform are in cloud cuckoo land if they think that the french would have signed a returns deal with us if we had left the european convention on human rights ? my hon . friend is right to point out that the fact that we are signed up to the european convention underpins other international agreements that we have with partners . it underpins the good friday agreement . it also underpins our treaty with the french on the france returns pilot . that is why we should be responsible in taking forward a conversation on reform of the convention , and that is the approach we are taking . i was taking that approach in my previous role , and i will carry on doing so as home secretary . i call the shadow minister . i warmly welcome the home secretary to her place . i very much look forward to the exchanges that we will have , so long as the prime minister leaves her in post . when it comes to human rights , does she not accept that tinkering around the edges simply will not work ? she said in her answer a second ago that she wants to see the echr reformed , but her own government ’s attorney general lord hermer said just four days ago that echr reform is a “ political trick ” . perhaps she and the attorney general should get themselves on the same page . given that the attorney general says that reform is not possible , does she not agree that more fundamental changes are needed , as my hon . friend order . you know the score ; you know we have to get through questions . when colleagues do not get in , they will blame the shadow home secretary . please try to help others . after that performance , i have to confess that i find myself rather missing the shadow justice secretary , what recent progress she has made on establishing a national inquiry into grooming gangs . the process of selecting a respected and independent chair for the national inquiry into group - based child sexual exploitation and abuse is under way . a dedicated victims and survivors panel is supporting the process . the inquiry ’s terms of reference will of course follow , shaped by a public consultation . the inquiry will be trauma - informed and time - limited , as recommended by baroness casey , ensuring accountability , truth and change . it beggars belief that the inquiry inches along at such a dreadfully slow pace . with the scottish government ruling out an inquiry there , will the home secretary please commit to fast - tracking a thoroughgoing inquiry into the grooming gang scandal , for the sake of the victims ? for the sake of the victims , who we all think about today , we must ensure that we get this right . there were multiple issues with the chair at the start of baroness jay ’s inquiry , which took many years . we want to do what baroness casey has recommended , do this right and properly , and do this alongside the victims , whom we are talking to . we must , of course , lead the way on this . we will ensure that we get the right strategy ; it is for scotland and the scottish government to decide on whether to have a similar strategy . it is important to say that , alongside having this important national strategy , we are putting in place lots of other policies to tackle this kind of crime . i call the shadow minister . the conservatives raised the issue of a national statutory inquiry in january . the government attempted to block our calls for an inquiry until they were forced into a u - turn in june . on “ this government will not lose any more time in pursuing truth and justice for victims and survivors , ” — [ official report , yet here we stand today — no start date , no chair announced , and no terms of reference agreed . the victims need actions , not words , so will the minister please tell the victims of these abhorrent crimes when the national inquiry will begin — or will this secretary of state have to be forced into action , just like the last ? i will not take any lessons from the hon . lady , given that the previous inquiry was not implemented in any way , shape or form by the previous government . through the crime and policing bill , we are putting in place baroness jay ’s key recommendations , which is the right thing to do . it is so important that we make the right decisions about the chair , the terms of reference and the process for this inquiry , which has victims at its heart . we are following baroness casey ’s advice , and as the hon . lady will hear soon , we will ensure that we have the right chair and the right approach for the victims . we can do no less . if she will make a statement on her departmental responsibilities . i would like to use this statement to address the subject of this weekend ’s events . on saturday , well over 100,000 protesters marched in london . many were exercising the ancient right to peaceful protest,—but not everyone did . some turned on the brave police officers who were there to keep the peace ; 26 officers were injured and 24 protesters were arrested . those violent thugs will face the full force of the law . those who turned to violence on saturday do not represent what this country really is . when a foreign billionaire calls on our citizens to fight against our ancient democracy , i know that is met by the vast majority with a shake of the head . that is because we are in truth a tolerant country , and , yes , a diverse one , too . you can be english and have roots here that stretch back 1,000 years , but you can also be english and look like me . the st george ’s cross and the union jack belong to us all . they are symbols of unity — a kingdom united — and must never be used to divide us . i welcome the home secretary to her position . does she have plans to introduce a statutory cap on in - bound migration ? i have one job , and it is to secure our borders . i will do whatever it takes , but what i will never do is take the approach of the previous government , who were led by gimmicks and false promises that were never met . antisocial behaviour , including cars producing excessive noise along the southend seafront and westcliff roads , has long affected my constituents . southend city council , essex police and i are working hard to address those issues . will the home secretary set out how the government are going further , faster , in tackling antisocial behaviour , and how delivering on our commitment to have a named neighbourhood police officer in every community will directly benefit residents ? this year , £ 200 million has been made available to forces to kick - start the delivery of 13,000 more neighbourhood officers across england and wales . i would be very happy to talk to my hon . friend about the issues that he is facing . we must tackle antisocial behaviour . i call the shadow home secretary . does the home secretary accept that her predecessor was moved because this government are failing on immigration ? indeed , 75 % of the public think that the government are failing . illegal migration is up 38 % , making this the worst year in history . let me try again : will the home secretary take this opportunity to commit to real action , back our plans to disapply the human rights act 1998 in relation to all immigration matters , and immediately remove every illegal immigrant upon arrival ? i will take no lessons from anyone sitting on the conservative benches . their government utterly failed on both legal and illegal migration . this government , and this home secretary , will clean up their mess . the home secretary has some brass neck . this has been the worst year in history , with illegal migration up by 38 % . press reports this week suggest that a handful of illegal migrants might be removed to france — she has been silent about that so far — but that amounts to only 5 % of people crossing . does she accept that allowing 95 % of illegal immigrants to stay will be no deterrent , and will she commit to publishing full data on a weekly basis ? on the subject of brass neck , i will have to buy the shadow home secretary a mirror , so that he can stare at one . as i said , i will not take any lessons from him or any conservative . this government have got removals up to 35,000 , got asylum decisions moving again , and struck an historic agreement with france . we are working with our partners in france to get flights off the ground . will the minister give an update on the work of the defending democracy taskforce , please ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for the question , because the targeted intimidation and harassment of elected representatives is completely unacceptable . the defending democracy taskforce works to ensure the safety and security of all electoral processes and democratic institutions , and to strengthen democratic society . we are conducting a review of the harassment and intimidation faced by elected representatives . the taskforce has also concluded a review of transnational repression , and we have updated parliament on that . i hope this will be a shared endeavour , right across the house . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . this weekend , as the home secretary said , elon musk used a rally to call — alongside convicted criminal , so - called tommy robinson — for the dissolution of parliament , and to incite violence on our streets . given the seriousness of a high - profile figure apparently urging attacks on our democracy , what assessment has the home office made of these statements , and what steps are being taken across government to respond to them , and to protect our democracy ? there is both a legal question here and a political question . on the legal question , in all cases , including the one that the hon . lady raises , it is for the police and the crown prosecution service to decide independently whether the law has been broken and charges should be brought . we would never expect a minister to comment on that ; it would be improper to do so . on the political question , let me say this : the words that were used at the weekend are abhorrent , and i know that the vast majority of people in this country will feel the same way . whether you are a hostile state or a hostile foreign billionaire , no one gets to mess with british democracy . members of the all - party group on anti - corruption and responsible tax , which i chair , had the opportunity to meet national economic crime centre officers last week and discuss the work that necc is doing to disrupt money laundering and tax evasion , including through its landmark operation machinize . high - street money laundering is of huge concern to me , given the explosion of cash - intensive businesses over recent years seeking to hide beneath a veneer of respectability in order to conceal their dirty money . what measures is the minister taking to empower trading standards , local councils , his majesty ’s revenue and customs and law enforcement to tackle this issue head - on ? i am grateful to my hon . friend and the appg for their work . the government are absolutely committed to tackling high street money laundering to deliver safer streets and economic growth working closely with partners through multi - agency initiatives like operation machinize . we have strengthened the powers under the economic , crime and corporate transparency act 2023 , and have funded 475 new roles under the anti - money laundering and asset recovery programme to detect and investigate offences . just over a week ago , nearly 1,000 peaceful protesters , including priests and pensioners , were arrested in a single day for opposing the ban on palestine action , yet over the weekend , at the unite the kingdom protest , 26 police officers were injured and 25 arrests were made . does the home secretary agree with my constituents in dunbartonshire that this raises serious questions about proportionality , and will she consider reassessing the proscription of palestine action ? any attack on the police is utterly shameful . the right to peaceful protest is a cornerstone of our democracy — it is a freedom that we protect fiercely — but palestine action ’s activities have met the thresholds for proscription established in the terrorism act 2000 . the organisation has conducted an escalating campaign , involving sustained criminal damage to national security infrastructure , intimidation and alleged violence , including the use of weapons resulting in serious injuries to individuals . weaponisation of social media has become a real cancer in our society , with mps and others being targeted . what steps are the government taking on hostile state threats on social media that might be being used to undermine our democracy ? my hon . friend is right to raise this . new and emerging artificial intelligence technology has the potential to amplify threats to democracy , including through hyper - realistic bots , which are used to spread disinformation and misinformation at speed . the government are absolutely committed to addressing the threats , including by ensuring that social media platforms have the right systems in place to identify and tackle harmful material that breaches their terms of service . the attorney general has claimed that we need the european convention on human rights and the european court to solve the illegal migration crisis — an extraordinary claim . will the minister please explain , therefore , how australia managed to tackle its migration problems and how the us is managing to implement our rwanda plan , all outside the european convention that the attorney general says we need ? the hon . gentleman heard the home secretary ’s point on the convention , but it is clear that gimmicks such as rwanda do not work—£700 million for merely four volunteers to go . what works is effective processing , quick decisions and quick removals . that is what we will get under this government , and it is what we do not get from those who carp from the opposition benches . earlier this year , 15 - year - old harvey willgoose was murdered by a fellow pupil when attending school . his murderer has now been convicted and a national child safeguarding review panel set up , but time and time again such panels make the same recommendations and we fail to implement the kind of learnings and culture change that would ensure that another tragedy like this does not happen . will the home secretary reassure harvey ’s family that she will ensure that those panel recommendations are implemented and that we can avoid any family like harvey ’s suffering that same tragedy again ? we offer our sympathy to the family of harvey , whose death is a heartbreaking tragedy that has devastated the entire community . our thoughts remain with his family and friends . of course we recognise that pattern — i have seen it , too , in my constituency . that is why we are creating a child protection authority , as was recommended in a previous inquiry , to provide effective national oversight to ensure that lessons are learned . chichester city centre has seen a rise in antisocial behaviour , in particular by those on e - bikes and e - scooters . residents are understandably concerned about such bikes , which are often modified in the speed at which they can go . what is the minister doing to give sussex police powers to identify , remove and , most importantly , dispose of the e - bikes that are ridden so recklessly on our streets ? that is a concern that many members in the house share . the crime and policing bill will give the police powers to seize vehicles being used antisocially . i am happy to have a conversation with the hon . lady about what more we need to do . last year , a report by the charity justice and care highlighted that a lack of regulation allows unscrupulous business owners to exploit vulnerable people . nottingham trent university showed that 90 % of hand car wash businesses operate in a way that makes them high risk for forced or compulsory labour . will the government consider licensing sectors such as hand car washes to improve compliance and prevent illegal workers and modern slavery ? in the view of the home office , the most important safeguard is the right - to - work checks . that is why we will strengthen them under the border security , asylum and immigration bill that is making its way through parliament , but that will have to be underpinned with rigorous enforcement . that is why i am pleased that enforcement visits are up 50 % in the past year , as are arrests . the 2018 definition of islamophobia by the all - party parliamentary group on british muslims said that the debate about rape gangs was a form of “ anti - muslim racism ” . among other alarming things , it said that raising concerns about entryism into government by extremists , which is an established tactic of the muslim brotherhood , was islamophobic . the home secretary endorsed that definition . does she still believe that addressing the religion of rape - gang members or identifying muslim brotherhood entryism is islamophobic , or does she now disown that definition ? that definition sought to give context to patterns of behaviour . let me be clear for the hon . gentleman and the whole house : there is absolutely no excuse for , or hiding of , the criminality of those who engage in heinous crimes such as those involving rape or grooming gangs . that is why the government will take forward the casey recommendations and have that national inquiry . he knows that the government are working with a working group on a definition of islamophobia . we have been absolutely clear that we will not pursue any measures that would impinge on our ancient right of freedom of speech . ensuring that our town centres are safe , vibrant and welcoming is hugely important in clwyd north . i warmly welcome the government ’s safer streets summer initiative in rhyl and colwyn bay . from walkabouts i have done recently with local police , it is clear that a strong community police presence is crucial to tackling antisocial behaviour where it arises . will the home secretary ensure that north wales police have all the resources they need all year around in rhyl , denbigh , abergele and colwyn bay to help build back our town centres ? so far , we have had really good feedback from over 500 town centres that have taken part in the safer streets summer initiative . that initiative finishes at the end of september , so we will have proper analysis then , but it is our priority to ensure that our police have the resources they need all year round . when will levels of shoplifting finally reduce rather than rise , as they have under this government ? as we were discussing earlier , targeting shoplifting is an absolute priority for this government . we have a raft of interventions and we are taking legislative action to protect our retail workers , who have been particularly affected by a massive increase in abuse as well as a rise in crime . i congratulate the new team and welcome them to the government front bench . a week is a long time , but i had a promise to meet the previous minister to discuss the immigration system , because one of the challenges that the home secretary has inherited is a broken processing system . as one of the home office ’s largest customers for my constituents , i know where the gaps and the problems are , so i would welcome a meeting with the minister about that , if the home secretary agrees . i share my hon . friend ’s important interest in that issue . i would never miss a chance to meet her and i would be very glad to do so . i call the chair of the home affairs committee . i welcome members of the new government front bench team to their places . the previous ministerial team had been clear that they wanted to stop the use of large sites to house asylum seekers , but there has been some indication that that position may have changed . will the home secretary or the minister clarify the position , and confirm that if they are changing that position , they will learn the lessons of what went wrong previously ? i look forward to working with the right hon . lady and her committee in its important work . we have made a significant commitment to the closure of asylum hotels , which is crucial for public conference . it is a matter of record that we are looking at big sites , including ministry of defence sites , but we will of course look very closely at the history in this space to ensure that anything that we do is effective and sustained . i warmly welcome the home secretary and her team to their places . the home secretary will be aware of the recent horrific attack and rape of a sikh woman in oldbury , in my constituency , who reportedly had racist abuse directed at her . the case is being treated as a hate crime and a suspect is under arrest . what steps is the home secretary taking to support west midlands police in securing justice in the case , and to address the wider concerns of the sikh and other ethnic minority communities regarding the increase of racism in the public discourse , which can lead to targeted violence and damage community safety ? the horror of a sexual assault motivated by race or ethnicity is absolutely appalling . i am sure that the whole house will join me in condemning such crimes in the strongest possible terms . on the specifics of the case , it is an ongoing criminal investigation and it is imperative that we allow the justice system to do its work . i urge anyone with any further information about the case to get in touch with west midlands police as soon as possible . i hope that my hon . friend and members across the house will have heard my comments earlier , when i said that this government will not stand for any incitement to racial hatred or violence . it is imperative and incumbent on all members of the house to ensure that we all jointly and collectively hold that line . in an earlier answer , the minister referred to the increasing use by police of live facial recognition . while that may well have some effect on tackling crime , it is being used without any legal framework and no national instructions . will she say when those will be put in place ? facial recognition is being used in a controlled way for high harm individuals . there is guidance about how it should be used , but i am happy to have a further conversation with the right hon . gentleman about that , as i am aware that members from across the house have raised the issue of the framework within which it operates . i pay tribute to my former colleagues for the way that they professionally policed the protests over the weekend , and i wish those who were injured a speedy recovery . police officers can not join a union and they have only one staff association — the police federation — to choose from , the chief executive of which reportedly took home over £ 600,000 last year . will the new ministerial team commit to reviewing whether that monopoly can really serve the interests of our brave police officers ? we need to ensure that our police officers are given the best support that they can be given through the police federation , which is the vehicle by which they are supported through any incidents they have . i will be working very closely with it to ensure that it is doing the right thing on behalf of its members . i would not be here today without wimbledon police station ; in 2014 , two brave officers from that station saved me from a murderous attack . wimbledon police station is now under threat , with its front counter due to close . does the home secretary agree that local police stations such as wimbledon ’s are critical to neighbourhood policing and community safety ? i am very sorry to hear about the hon . gentleman ’s incident ; that must have been absolutely terrifying . we need to ensure that our neighbourhood police are responsive and are there when we need them most , which is why we are targeting the resources we have to ensure that we have neighbourhood policing . the response teams must be there when we need them through any means of getting in touch with them , whether it is on the phone , online or in person , and we need to ensure that they are there . when police officers up and down the country — like my former colleagues — reach 20 years of service , they receive a long - term service medal , but police community support officers do not seem to receive any recognition for long service . will the minister agree to look into providing similar recompense and recognition for the service that pcsos provide ? i hesitate to announce new policy in week one , but i certainly think there needs to be some kind of recognition for our pcsos , who do such an incredible job across all our communities . is the home secretary aware that 20 % of officers in the metropolitan police are currently either suspended or on restricted duties , with senior officers warning that the situation is unsustainable ? does she agree that we need urgently to review both welfare and disciplinary processes in our police services so that towns such as romford can get more police actually patrolling our streets ? i agree . we need to ensure that resources are targeted in the places where we need them . we have made significant reforms to police standards already , ensuring that officers who fail background checks , for example , are sacked and that gross misconduct leads to dismissal , but we need to ensure that that is right , proper and appropriate and that our police are out on the streets where we need them to be . i am very happy to have a conversation with the hon . gentleman about how these incidents are being operated ; i will be having that conversation with the mayor , and i have already had it with the commissioner . last week , our us allies pulled back from the global engagement centre their international effort to tackle cyber - threats . what steps is the minister taking to ensure that our democracy is protected from foreign interference , cyber - threats and misinformation ? we take all those threats incredibly seriously . we hosted the five country ministerial meetings with our american , canadian , australian and kiwi allies just last week . we work incredibly closely with our partners to ensure that we are doing everything we can to support uk businesses and to target the perpetrators of these attacks . people in my constituency have raised with me problems of hare coursing , thefts , speeding and fly - tipping . will the minister meet me to discuss how we can tackle the wide range of crimes in rural areas ? i am happy to meet with the hon . lady . before i call the minister , i wish to make a brief statement . i found out only this morning that the charges against the two individuals relating to espionage for the chinese authorities were to be dropped . i do not think that is good . of course , we do not discuss the detail of security matters relating to parliament on the floor of the house , but given the very important issues raised by this case , i ask officials to consider whether any further steps should be taken — operational , strategic or legal — to ensure that all those who work in this parliament are able to undertake their activities securely and without interference . i am a very unhappy speaker with what has happened . the fact that it has taken two years , until today , for somebody to withdraw this case is not good enough . this morning , the crown prosecution service decided not to proceed with the prosecution of christopher cash and christopher berry , who had been charged with espionage for china under the official secrets act 1911 . members right across the house will be aware that the charges related to allegations of chinese espionage within parliament and will want reassurance , as will you , mr speaker . many members will be as extremely disappointed as i am that there will now not be a trial . the decision not to proceed with this prosecution is an independent one for the cps to make in its role as the uk ’s independent prosecuting authority . however , i want to be clear that the government remain gravely concerned about the threat of chinese espionage . parliament and our democracy are sacrosanct , and any attempt by any foreign power to infiltrate or interfere with parliamentary proceedings is completely unacceptable . with your permission , mr speaker , i will therefore set out the measures the government are taking to tackle any residual risks arising from this case and outline the wider approach the government are taking to protecting our democracy and countering state threats , including those from china . the decision of the cps related to charges under the official secrets act 1911 , which was the relevant legislation in force at the time . it is well known that state threats legislation had not kept pace with the changing threats we face . the official secrets act was passed to counter the threat from german spies before the first world war . it referred to espionage as obtaining “ any sketch , plan , model , article , note , document , or information ” that “ might be … useful to an enemy ” . clearly , that language — drafted well over 100 years ago — does not reflect the types of espionage or state threats we face in the modern day , nor the breadth of states that engage directly in that activity . for that reason , the uk passed and has now commenced the national security act 2023 with cross - party support . that legislation , which replaced the official secrets act 1911 , brings new criminal offences and powers to bear against the full range of modern - day state threats . moreover , the national security act is state agnostic , removing the unhelpful “ enemy ” language from the official secrets act and focusing on the malign activity we are all concerned about . the act also introduced the foreign influence registration scheme , which the government brought into force on this case hits at the heart of our democracy , so let me be clear : the government will not tolerate any state threats to the uk and its democratic institutions . we will robustly challenge china when necessary , as we would challenge any country for unacceptable behaviour on our soil . i can confirm that the foreign office has démarched the chargé d’affaires of the chinese embassy in london to make clear that we will not tolerate any activity that interferes in our democracy . mi5 is considering the provision of additional advice to those most at risk of being targeted by state - led espionage , and the government are taking robust action to counter state threats and continue to build up the uk ’s resilience . in april , we established a new cross - government state threats unit to better co - ordinate our response to state threats . as i set out following the recently completed review of transnational repression , new training modules on identifying and countering state threats are being offered to all 45 territorial police forces through the college of policing and are mandatory for counter - terrorism policing officers . we have committed to legislate as soon as parliamentary time allows to take forward the recommendations of jonathan hall kc , the independent reviewer of terrorism and state threats legislation . that includes creating a new proscription - style tool for state threats . as the former foreign secretary , my right hon . friend as you are aware , mr speaker , the safety and security of our parliament is of the utmost importance . that is why the national protective security authority will issue new protective security guidance to parliamentarians and political staff on protection against foreign interference and espionage . that guidance outlines the potential risks we all may face in our day - to - day work , and how we can all better protect ourselves . i urge colleagues to read and follow the advice once issued . i also urge members to take up the national cyber security centre ’s important opt - in service for members of both houses . it allows the ncsc to alert individuals if it identifies evidence of malicious activity on their personal devices or accounts , and swiftly advise them on steps to take to protect their information . the strategic defence review was clear that china presents a sophisticated and persistent challenge . as the national security strategy reinforced , instances of china ’s espionage , interference in our democracy and undermining of our economic security have increased in recent years . as i have set out , we are addressing those threats , but there are also opportunities we need to grasp as we navigate our complex relationship with china . the last government did not describe china as an enemy , and this government do not think our relationship can be simplified down to a single word . instead , we are taking a consistent , long - term approach to china , firmly rooted in the uk ’s global interests . i finish by paying tribute to our law enforcement , security and intelligence agencies , who do so much to keep us all safe . they operate often in secret , often in the shadows and often at great personal danger , but they have our enduring gratitude . while we are extremely disappointed with the outcome in this case , the legislation it relied on has already been changed . should we need to go further , we will not hesitate to do what is necessary to keep our country safe . i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow home secretary . let me start by thanking the security minister for the briefing and information he provided ahead of his statement . let me also join him in paying tribute to the officers in our police force and in the security service . they work so hard and take personal risks to keep us safe . let us start with parliament ’s intelligence and security committee ’s assessment of china , published a year or two ago . it found that china had penetrated every sector of our economy . when the security minister a moment ago said that china merely posed a “ challenge ” , he was wrong i think to use that word . china poses a threat . it poses a threat because it participates and organises systemic espionage into our public institutions , including parliament . it purloins intellectual property from universities and from companies , particularly in the technology sectors , and it routinely spies on the uk as a state . they also engage in transnational repression of chinese citizens here , for instance running secret , undeclared police stations and putting bounties on the heads of individuals . the word “ challenge ” is not strong enough ; the state of china poses a threat . the security minister said that the government would “ robustly challenge china ” , but let me gently point to some of the decisions that the government have taken in practice . we saw a signal back at the g7 last year , when the prime minister was , i am afraid to say , obsequious in dealing with president xi , appearing to prioritise economic links above security considerations . we have not seen any decision to place china in the enhanced tier of the firs scheme , although that regime has been in place for several months , and the government seem to be viewing with favour the application for a new super - embassy in london , to which our allies , including america , are urging us not to consent and which many of our intelligence services say will be used as a base for espionage activities . so the government ’s record on china causes deep concern , but of equal concern is this specific case — and , mr speaker , you explained why that is of particular concern to parliament , given that the alleged espionage activities touch directly on parliament and the way in which members of parliament do their duty . i have in front of me a briefing provided to the press by the crown prosecution service , dated “ prejudicial to the safety or interests of the united kingdom . ” given the gravity of that assessment , it is astonishing that these charges have now been withdrawn . the crown prosecution service clearly assessed these allegations , and the evidence , against the law — against the 1911 act — in 2024 , and found the test to have been met ; so why today , more than a year later , have we suddenly been told that the test is no longer met ? my question to the security minister is a simple one : given the gravity of the charges that i have just read out , what has changed between last year and this year ? why has a case that met the threshold and met the test in april 2024 all of a sudden been determined not to do so ? may i ask specifically whether anyone in the government put any pressure on the crown prosecution service in relation to this case ? did the government co - operate fully with the police , the security services and the cps in providing the information required , including information relating to the definition of “ an enemy ” ? can the security minister give the house those express assurances ? i certainly share your concern , mr speaker , and , i am sure , the concern of many others , that what appears to be extremely serious espionage , assessed as such in the written disclosure that i read out — assessed by the deputy national security adviser as being prejudicial to our national interests — has all of a sudden , and with no explanation , been dropped , even though previously , just a year and a bit ago , it was assessed that this case did meet the threshold . the house and the country need to know what exactly has changed . let me seek to address the shadow home secretary ’s points . he raised the question of whether china constitutes a threat or not . i think i was very clear in the language that i used . as the right hon . gentleman will know , and as the government set out in the strategic defence review , china presents a “ sophisticated and persistent challenge ” . the reality is that , in government , there is an absolute requirement to co - operate with nations all around the world . when there are areas in which we need to challenge china , of course we will do so . i am sure the right hon . gentleman and other opposition members will completely understand that when there are areas , in terms of economic co - operation , in which we need to work closely with china , of course we will do so , because it is absolutely in our national interest . i referenced the comments of the previous foreign secretary , and the shadow home secretary might want to look back at what was said following the china audit . the previous foreign secretary was absolutely crystal clear : we will take a long - term , strategic approach to china that is rooted in the uk ’s national interest . i understand why the shadow home secretary wants to boil down such a complex bilateral relationship into a single word , but the reality is that it is neither helpful nor sensible to do so . the shadow home secretary will not be surprised to hear that i do not agree with his characterisations of what he described as the “ signals ” that this government have sent to china . in truth , i will not take any lessons from him on that , not least because — i have said this to him previously — it was not so long ago that a conservative prime minister took the leader of china to the pub . when it comes to signals , i am not sure that the shadow home secretary speaks with a huge amount of authority . the shadow home secretary spoke about firs . he knows that the government ’s position is that no decision has been taken with regard to the enhanced tier and china , and any decision taken by the government will be announced in the normal way . firs is a crucial tool , and i am proud that this government have got on and implemented it as of the shadow home secretary specifically raised the issue of the embassy in london , as i am sure other hon . members will . he will know that china ’s application to build a new embassy in london is going through an independent planning process . a final decision on planning permission will be made in due course by the secretary of state for housing , communities and local government , but i can be absolutely clear , in relation to firs , the nature of the threat and the embassy , that national security has been , and will continue to be , a core priority for this government throughout the process . the shadow home secretary asked about the cps decision . i know that he understands that he is asking me about decisions made by the cps that are entirely independent of government . this was an independent decision made by the cps , and it is not for any government minister to speculate on the reasons behind it . as i have said — i have been crystal clear — the government are extremely disappointed with the outcome in this case , and we remain extremely concerned about the espionage threat posed to the united kingdom . i hope that the intelligence and security committee will get a good chance to dig into what has happened in this place , because we are hampered in the chamber by not being able to look at sensitive issues . i also hope that the minister will lend his weight to the approval of many senior members of this house , prior to the last election — it got as far as the last prime minister — to create a committee to look at sensitive spending , but also sensitive issues . in the summer , this government chose to reintroduce extradition arrangements with hong kong , despite the application of the chinese security act . given what the minister has said today , how can we square both of those positions ? i hope that my hon . friend knows that this government hugely appreciate and respect the relationship we have with hongkongers . through the processes in place , we will absolutely ensure that nobody , be they a hongkonger or any other nationality , is extradited for reasons of political expediency . i can also point her to the important work , which we take incredibly seriously , on transnational repression . i previously made a statement to this house , and i hope that she and others understand the seriousness with which we take these activities . we are working closely with our international allies , and we are doing everything we can to ensure that the uk is a hard target for these threats , wherever they might originate . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . as always , i am very grateful to the minister for advance sight of his statement . for years , the chinese communist party has worked to undermine the democratic institutions and values that underpin our society . this house is all too aware of the warnings , not least from the intelligence and security committee ’s excoriating report on china . that report made it clear that the previous government lacked a coherent strategy for dealing with the threat posed by the chinese state and that insufficient resources had been committed to meet that challenge . we expect to see better from this government . we are faced with a case in which two men , one of them a parliamentary researcher with close links to senior mps , were accused of serious offences under the official secrets act , only for the crown prosecution service to drop those charges due to insufficient evidence . in this context , the decision is deeply worrying . it raises serious questions about the uk ’s capacity to detect and prosecute espionage linked to hostile states , particularly china . so what specific issues with the evidence led the cps to conclude that the threshold for prosecution was no longer met ? more broadly , what does this outcome say about our preparedness to respond to threats from foreign intelligence services operating on our soil , and even within the corridors of this parliament ? the government must make protecting our democracy a national security priority . that means implementing the recommendations of the isc ’s china report in full , and ensuring that we are not left exposed to foreign interference simply because our systems are not equipped to respond . finally , the minister again today committed to introduce legislation for a proscription mechanism for state and state - linked bodies as soon as parliamentary time allows . could he update us on the timeline for bringing this forward and what its scope will be ? i am grateful to the hon . member , as i aways am , for the very sensible and reasonable way in which she has made her comments . she raises a number of important observations , many of which i agree with . i do have to say to her what i said to the shadow home secretary , which is that it would be completely inappropriate for me to speculate about the reasons why the cps sought to make this decision . i completely understand why right hon . and hon . members would ask me about it , but i hope they also understand that i am not able to talk about why the cps has decided to make this decision . that is very much a matter for it , not for the government . on the other points the hon . member raised , let me give her an assurance that the government do everything we possibly can to ensure that the uk is a hard target to guard against those malign forces , wherever they may come from , that seek to infiltrate or interfere with our democratic processes . we will ensure that our security and intelligence services and agencies and law enforcement have the necessary tools and resources they need to do the difficult job of guarding against the threats we face . obviously , as she understands very well , there is also a legislative framework for that , and that is why , i understand , she asked the question about jonathan hall kc and the recommendations that she has made recently . as she knows , we have made an absolute commitment that we will legislate as soon as we can , and i give her an assurance that that work continues at pace . i thank the minister for his statement . i think we have a duty — all democracies have a duty — to protect democracy from its enemies . i do not doubt that our allies face exactly the same challenges , so i would be interested to know what discussions we have had with our allies about this very challenge . the minister mentioned that mps and their offices would get new guidance . can he commit to a date for that being issued ? my hon . friend raises an important point about our allies . many of the threats and challenges we face are shared ones , which is precisely why the uk government convened the five countries ministerial conference last week . we were proud to host our allies from the five eyes nations , with which we work very closely , along with other important international co - operation arrangements . we do work very closely with our allies to ensure that , collaboratively and collectively , we are best able to guard against the threat we face . i can give my hon . friend an assurance that we will seek to ensure that the new guidance is in place as soon possible . i also point to the fact that i wrote to all members of this house just before the recess with advice on protective security and other matters . however , should any member feel that they need additional support , we will work very closely with you , mr speaker , and the parliamentary security department to ensure that they get it . i call the chair of the home affairs committee . the minister made the point that the charges brought were under the old legislation , the official secrets act , which has now been superseded . has he made an assessment of whether the charges would have proceeded had the new offences been in place at the time the charges were brought ? will he be working with ministerial colleagues , law enforcement and others to look at whether new offences are needed in this case and in others ? if i may say so , that is a very clever question from the chair of the home affairs committee . i hope that the right hon . lady will understand that , given that the decision was communicated this morning , the department and the government will be looking at it very closely . i am confident that the new national security act gives the government — i genuinely pay tribute to the previous government for their work in introducing that groundbreaking legislation — the tools we need , but i know she will understand that we will look very closely at the decision communicated this morning and satisfy ourselves that we have all the necessary powers and tools to guard against the nature of the threat we face . i thank the minister for his statement . the first duty of any government is to keep their citizens safe , and i know that he has a track record of doing just that . he also rightly recognises that politics is not just about mps or members of the other place ; it is also about political staff , the clerks , everybody who works in this place , and everybody in local government . what reassurances can he give my constituents and the greater population that he will ensure that we stop foreign influence over our democratic processes for everybody ? i am grateful to my hon . friend , who raises an important point . i can give him and his constituents the assurances he seeks . the government take these threats incredibly seriously and we will do everything we need to do to keep the public safe . on behalf of the prime minister , i chair the defending democracy taskforce . the prime minister recently renewed the mandate of that cross - departmental mechanism , which ensures that we are able to provide a whole - of - government approach to the threats we face . the government take these matters incredibly seriously . these are not party political issues . i have always believed that these are matters that should be a shared endeavour . i will want to work with him and members right across the house to ensure that , collectively , we keep ourselves safe . i call the member who has been heavily involved in this , alicia kearns . i will be responding in a personal capacity , but may i start by thanking you , mr speaker , for the support you have given to us over the past two years ? i also place on record my gratitude to our intelligence community and counter - terrorism police , who are exceptional . from a securities perspective , today ’s events are disastrous . they will embolden our enemies and make us look unwilling to defend our own nation , even when attacked in this place , the mother of all parliaments . i am relieved that the national security act will make it safer and easier in future to prosecute foreign spies , but i urge the minister to reform the treason act so that traitors are prosecuted and face justice , put china in the enhanced tier , and support private prosecution . it remains unclear to me why chris cash and christopher berry can not be prosecuted under the official secrets act . the evidence shows a clear line between those two , the united front work department and the politburo — the very top of the chinese communist party . the information shared was prejudicial to the safety and interests of the uk , and i believe it put members at personal risk . my right hon . friend my question for the minister is simple : if officials , the security services and the police agree that the case was a slam dunk , why has the crown prosecution service not been able to get it over the line ? if the cps was not confident , why , given the compelling evidence , did it not put it to a jury and test it ? whoever is responsible for this decision — whether the director of public prosecutions , an official in his own department or the attorney general — they have weakened the defence of our country today and i am desperately sorry to see it . i am very grateful to the hon . lady for her remarks , and i completely understand why she has phrased them in the way that she has . let me also join her in thanking you , mr speaker , for the work you have done to keep parliamentarians safe . over the next few days , weeks , months and years , it is vital that we work together . i look forward to meeting you later on today to discuss how we can ensure that we work together to safeguard all our parliamentary colleagues . turning to the substance of the remarks made by the hon . lady , i agree with her characterisation of the national security act . i will look very carefully at the points she made specifically with regard to treason . on her assessment of the decision that has been made , i completely understand why she has arrived at that conclusion , as will members right across the house . in my opening remarks , i expressed my extreme disappointment at the decision that has been made . these remarks , and the judgments people are forming in the house this afternoon , will be heard by the cps . i know that she will take every opportunity — as will as i have said previously , i am not able to speculate on the reason why the cps has taken this decision . i am extremely disappointed that it has done so , but i will do everything i can to ensure that government are organised so that we can ensure we have the resources in the right place to stand against the threats that we face . i have raised with the security minister on several occasions the fears of the hong kong community in bracknell and across the country , and today is just another reminder of the long arm of the chinese state that so worries my constituents . given that , and given the real and genuine fears of the hong kong community , does the minister agree that it is important that as we seek , rightly , to reform the immigration system — it is good to see the migration minister , my hon . friend i am grateful to my hon . friend for the work he has done to support his constituents and champion hongkongers . hopefully he heard my earlier remarks about the respect and admiration that we have for hongkongers and the importance that we attach to our relationship . i completely understand the fears that have been represented by my hon . friend and a number of his constituents ; i have had a number of meetings with members of that community and will have further such meetings . i look forward to working with him and with colleagues in the department to ensure that those from the community feel that the government will protect them , because that is what we will always want to do . i make the following comments as somebody who has been sanctioned and hounded by the chinese government all the way through the past few years . i was briefed by the security services at the beginning that this was a slam - dunk prosecution — they were clear that they had met every single requirement within the official secrets act . as my right hon . friend the key here was the whole idea of the official secrets act defining that work as against an enemy — that is the key . so why in heaven ’s name did the government not take the opportunity , when it arose after the china audit , to raise china into the upper tier , as they did with russia , north korea and iran ? the minister speaks of threats , but he does not say that china is a threat ; he says it is a “ challenge ” , which is a ludicrous position to take . i honestly feel today that this government have let you down , mr speaker — the speaker of this parliament — after you bravely stood for people like me to protect us against the overtures of the chinese . they have let down parliament . nobody knows now whether they are safe , because these charges have been dropped . it is absolutely key , furthermore , that until we define china as what it is — a persistent threat that targets individuals , like me and others , and states — this will be a shame and a blot on our reputation as a strong state against terrorism . i recognise that the right hon . gentleman has , for entirely understandable reasons , a very long - standing interest in these matters , but i am afraid i do not agree with the assessment he has just offered . this government take the threats that we face , regardless of where they come from , incredibly seriously . we will do everything that we need to do to safeguard our parliament and our parliamentarians and to ensure that our democracy is not undermined or infiltrated by malign forces , wherever they might come from . i give the right hon . gentleman and the house a categorical assurance that we understand that national security is the first duty of government , and nothing — nothing — will get in the way of that . as someone who chaired the intelligence and security committee throughout its china inquiry and who criticised the previous government ’s position on china , i am sad to see that this government do not seem to understand the importance of signals . it sends a signal to describe “ chinese challenges ” but not “ chinese communist threats ” . it sends a signal to allow china to build a super - embassy against the advice of the security services . it sends a signal not to put china in the top tier of the foreign influence registration scheme , and it sends a signal above all to allow it to buy up increasingly important parts of our economy and national infrastructure . can we stop sending the wrong signals ? the only signal that this government will send is that threats to our country , wherever they come from , will not be tolerated . china has broken international agreements with the uk . it has placed bounties on the heads of hongkongers seeking refuge in this country . today ’s announcement that charges have been dropped will only embolden china in its efforts to interfere with our democracy . the minister has mentioned the effectiveness of the foreign influence registration scheme , so will he now assure us that all relevant officials , including those in the administration of hong kong , will be placed in the enhanced tier of the scheme ? i am grateful to the hon . member for his remarks , but i hope that he would acknowledge that the incidents he described , about which he rightly has concerns , were condemned by the uk government at the time . the uk government have been clear about the fact that we will not tolerate transnational repression on those living in the uk . firs falls out of the national security act , and he knows that we have already announced that two nations will be included on the enhanced tier . any further decision about other nations being included will be made in due course . the minister euphemistically described our relationship with china as “ complex ” . it is not complex . it is characterised by espionage , malign behaviour and a massive trade imbalance . how is that complex , and why do this government persist in opposing the views of their advisers and permitting — even facilitating — this massive centre for espionage close to the centre of our financial quarter ? i have a lot of time for the right hon . gentleman , but i do not agree with what he has just said , i am afraid , nor do i agree with the characterisation he makes around the embassy . i have said to him and the house previously that national security will be the overriding priority with regard to any decision that is made independently in a quasi - judicial process led by the secretary of state . i can again give him an assurance that when it comes to any decision about the embassy , as has been detailed in letters that the previous foreign secretary and i have sent , national security will absolutely be at the forefront of any consideration . there is a very nasty smell about the collapse of this chinese spying affair case . just over a year ago , the crown prosecution service counter - terrorism unit said after complex investigations that these were very serious allegations and that charges were brought , but now we are supposed to believe that it can not provide any evidence whatsoever . it feels to me as if one of two things has happened here : either the crown prosecution service was wrong — potentially incompetent — or someone very high up in the government has interfered with this situation . which is it , minister ? when the hon . member takes a moment to think carefully about these things , he will understand that government ministers should not speculate on the reasons provided for a particular decision by the crown prosecution service , which is independent of government . it would be entirely improper for any minister to do that . i am happy to give him and any other member who needs it an absolute assurance of how seriously we take the threats we face from a range of different malign forces around the country . this government will ensure that we are best able , best prepared and best resourced to guard against the nature of the threat , and nothing will stop us doing that . the security minister mentioned the official secrets act 1911 , but he will know that it was updated in 1920 and , indeed , in 1989 . as one of the co - authors of the intelligence and security committee ’s china report , along with my right hon . friend there has been reference to the isc looking at the case as it is currently looking at the data leak around the afghan relocations and assistance policy , but the reality is that the legislation that set up the committee — one part over 30 years ago and one part over a decade ago — is not fit for purpose . a lot of trust is invested in that committee . is it not time that with more power and funding going to the intelligence and security committee — with even more responsibility being put on it , to be fair — it should be given more powers so that this parliament and the people we represent know there is proper democratic parliamentary oversight of the intelligence community in this country ? they are wonderful and they do a fantastic job , but they are sometimes fallible . i am grateful to the right hon . member for his remarks , as well as the work he has done in this area and his service on the committee . as a former committee member , he will understand that the committee is fiercely independent of government , and rightly so , but i happen to think it does an outstanding job . it is a great asset for parliament . as security minister , i will want to work incredibly closely with the committee and co - operate with it whenever we can . it is clearly not for me to suggest particular matters that it may wish to investigate , but knowing the chair and the deputy chair as i do , i think it entirely likely that it may decide to look closely at this particular matter . the minister is clearly not happy with the cps ’s decision , and therefore the government are not , and the house is obviously not either . because the two suspects did not face a trial , double jeopardy does not come into play . will the minister undertake to explore with the attorney general the scope for him to bring a case against those two , if not under the official secrets act to test the case with a jury , then under the new legislation , which clearly would present no problem in court terms ? i certainly agree with the hon . member in his assessment of my being not happy . the decision was communicated this morning . the points he raised were reasonable , constructive and helpful , so let me take them away and consider them with colleagues across government . the threat to our national security from china is real , and i share the disappointment and concern expressed . however , the minister will also be aware that china has used entirely bogus national security charges to imprison a british citizen , jimmy lai , who has now been in solitary confinement for five years and whose health is deteriorating rapidly . this morning , his son sebastien lai asked to see the prime minister to press him to do more . will the minister reinforce that case and take every action possible to get the chinese to release jimmy lai ? jimmy lai should be released immediately . the joint committee on human rights , of which i am a member , published an inquiry report into transnational repression earlier this year . it welcomed the introduction of a foreign influence registration scheme but expressed concern about the absence of china on the enhanced tier . its absence risks undermining the credibility and coherence of the scheme . will the minister listen to colleagues from across the house , pick up the recommendations of the report and include china on the enhanced tier ? i am grateful to the hon . member for the work he does on the committee . i hope that when i gave evidence to the committee , i conveyed the seriousness and importance that we attach to matters relating to transnational repression . i am genuinely grateful to the committee for the work it has done and the report it published . i will respond to it as soon as i am able to do so . the minister has repeatedly said that it is not his job to speculate on the cps . he is right , but it is his job to defend the security of this country and therefore to ask the cps why it has not brought charges . has he done that ? has he rung the cps before he came to the house to speak to it and to understand why it has not gone ahead ? if not , why not ? i accept the charge the hon . gentleman makes against me that it is my responsibility to defend our national security , and i hope he understands that that is something i take incredibly seriously . the decision was communicated this morning . this was an independent decision , but i give him and others an assurance that we will , of course , look incredibly closely at it . in early june , the government told me that the report regarding the inclusion of china in the enhanced tier would come forward in due course . as the minister said in his statement , the chargé d’affaires at the chinese embassy has now been démarched . can the minister outline why china has not been included in the enhanced tier of the foreign influence registration scheme , because if national security is the first duty of government and nothing will get in the way of that , why are the government dithering when it comes to formally challenging china ? we are not doing what the hon . gentleman suggests we are . what we are seeking to do is ensure that we have all the right tools to guard against the nature of the threats that we face . we take that incredibly seriously . he knows our policy with regard to firs , which this government introduced on is the alarming takeaway from this , both for this house and for any potential spy , that we are being asked to believe that the espionage in which messrs cash and berry engaged is not a criminal offence ? is that where our defence of national security has got to ? the takeaway is that the cps made an independent decision this morning , and that this government will do everything we can to keep the country safe . that is the takeaway . the minister is an honourable man , but our disquiet and our constituents ’ concerns run very deep . while i welcome the improved legislation in place to deal with the issue , the fact of the matter is that once again — i say this with great respect — the government are being seen nationally as weak on criminal activity , and particularly on the action of the three defendants . when will the government remind the world that this great nation , the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland , is a strong nation that meets our enemies face to face and on any footing ? will the government send the message that any foreign operatives on our soil will be rooted out and will pay a price for working against this sovereign nation ? i hold the hon . gentleman in the highest regard , so i hope that he will not mind me gently pointing out to him that i could not have been clearer in my earlier remarks about how seriously we take these issues . we will work very closely with allies and partners right around the world to ensure that we do everything we can to guard against the threats that we face . i call alicia kearns on a point of order . may i just say what a pleasure it is to see you back ? thank you , mr speaker . that is very kind . i shall be returning home to my four - month - old in a couple of hours . on a point of order , mr speaker , government front benchers are unable to answer the questions of this house regarding the decision making of the crown prosecution service , so can you kindly advise how this house can scrutinise the crown prosecution service and its decisions , as that is clearly the will of the house ? i am grateful to the hon . member for giving me notice of her point of order . i believe that this is a matter for the attorney general — who is responsible for the cps — and as he sits in the other place , maybe we will have to use the solicitor general as a way forward . in this case , i hope that a clear message has gone back to everybody that when we still have members of parliament who have sanctions , we can not let this go in the way that seems to have been done . further to that point of order , mr speaker , i am one of the mps who is currently sanctioned by china , and as one of the founders of the china research group i am one of the mps who was spied upon here . i find it astonishing not just that this case , which was a slam dunk last year , has now been dropped , but that we are not even being told why it has been dropped . the one bright spot in this whole process has been your leadership on the issue , mr speaker , and in particular your decision to ban the chinese ambassador from this building for as long as members of this house are sanctioned . i worry that certain people will now come to you with honeyed words . how can i put on the record our thanks to you for your leadership , and also our hope that you will continue to stand strong on behalf of members of this house ? i think you have certainly put it on the record . i take seriously the sanctions that have been laid . my worry is that we have foreign state actors who do not believe in democracy , and democracy within this house . we must defend our democracy ; we must defend members of parliament . i have to say a big thank you to our head of security , who has worked very hard on this . i am sure — not that they would make this judgment — that we are all disappointed with the outcome , including the minister . application for emergency debate ( i seek leave to propose that the house debates a specific and important matter requiring urgent consideration , namely the appointment process and circumstances leading to the dismissal of the former ambassador of the united kingdom to the united states , lord mandelson . this is a matter of utmost concern across the house and across party lines . our ambassador in washington stands at the centre of britain ’s most vital bilateral relationship . it is a role of exceptional sensitivity , with more classified intelligence crossing the ambassador ’s desk than reaches most cabinet ministers . the post carries immense responsibility . the ambassador represents britain ’s interests to our most powerful ally and , in so doing , shapes our reputation abroad . his conduct , both prior to appointment and during , must reflect the highest standards of professionalism , discretion and integrity — nothing less will do . lord mandelson failed that test long before last week ’s revelation , long before the understandable public outrage at the disgraceful behaviour with the paedophile epstein , and long before the families of his victims quite rightly criticised the appointment . what was public about mandelson ’s past is more than enough to disqualify him from consideration for ambassador , from his resignation from government not once but twice — first in 1998 for not telling the truth about an interest - free loan , and then in 2001 for helping a wealthy businessman get a passport — to his links to the russian oligarch oleg deripaska , a gangster capitalist who benefited to the tune of many millions of pounds from policies promoted and signed off by lord mandelson when he was eu trade commissioner , and , particularly relevant today , his commercial links defending china . all of that was in the public domain before the prime minister appointed lord mandelson as our ambassador . why was it ever thought acceptable to appoint a man with such a chequered and murky background to such a vitally important position ? the house needs to know what vetting was done and when , what the opinions were of the foreign office , the foreign secretary , the cabinet office and the security services , and when the prime minister was told . we need to know who knew what , and when . the government must take the house with them on these appointments , but their behaviour to date on this issue has been marked by obfuscation and delay , by recrimination and cover - up . it is not just a question of the prime minister ’s political judgment , important as that is ; it is a question of ethics . it is a question of what is deemed acceptable behaviour , when in positions of power . the house must have the opportunity to debate this matter before the recess . i have listened carefully to the application from the right hon . member and am satisfied that the matter raised is proper to be discussed under application agreed to . the right hon . member has obtained the leave of the house . the debate will be held tomorrow , on a point of order , mr speaker . may i seek your guidance ? i led an adjournment debate last wednesday . in an intervention on the minister for secondary care , “ the misquoting of things that have been said”.—[official report , the quotation that i referred to in the debate were his words , sourced from my london news , which reported that the hon . member told the local democracy reporting service that the hillingdon conservatives who organised the petition against the closure of the hospital were guilty of “ faux outrage on this matter ” , which he said was “ both laughable and offensive ” . if the hon . member has been notified of my intent to raise this point of order and disputes the words reported by the local democracy reporting service , i am sure that he can say so , but how can i place on the record that the words i ascribed to him—“faux outrage”—were a direct quotation of his ? i assume that the hon . member has given notice to indicated assent . i thank the hon . member for the point of order and for giving notice of it . there are mechanisms for members to correct the record if they so wish . he has put the matter on the record , but if he wishes to continue , i am sure that the government front benchers will have heard him . presentation and first reading ( mr lee dillon , supported by sarah dyke , liz jarvis , james maccleary , edward morello , martin wrigley and andrew george , presented a bill to make provision about the required speed and distance for passing horses in a moving vehicle ; to provide for the inclusion of equestrian safety in driving theory tests ; to make provision about the teaching of equestrian safety in driving education ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the following provisions shall apply to the employment rights bill for the purpose of supplementing the order of consideration of lords amendments ( 1 ) proceedings on consideration of lords amendments shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion five hours after their commencement . ( 2 ) the lords amendments shall be considered in the following order : 22 , 1 , 7 , 8 , 21 , 23 , 106 to 120 , 46 to 49 , 60 to 62 , 72 , 121 , 2 to 6 , 9 to 20 , 24 to 45 , 50 to 59 , 63 to 71 , 73 to 105 and 122 to 169 . subsequent stages ( 3 ) any further message from the lords may be considered forthwith without any question being put . ( 4 ) proceedings on the first of any further messages from the lords shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion two hours after their commencement . ( 5 ) proceedings on any subsequent message from the lords shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion one hour after their commencement.—(gen kitchen . ) question agreed to . consideration of lords amendments i must draw the house ’s attention to the fact that lords amendments 66 , 88 , 90 , 91 and 101 engage commons financial privilege . if any of those lords amendments is agreed to , i will cause the customary entry waiving commons financial privilege to be entered in the journal . 4.43 pm i beg to move amendment ( a ) to lords amendment 22 . with this it will be convenient to discuss : lords amendment 22 and government amendment ( b ) . lords amendment 1 , and government motion to disagree . lords amendment 7 , and government motion to disagree . lords amendment 8 , and government motion to disagree . lords amendment 21 , government motion to disagree , and government amendments ( a ) and ( b ) in lieu . lords amendment 23 , and government motion to disagree . lords amendment 106 , government motion to disagree , and government amendment ( a ) to the words so restored to the bill . lords amendments 107 to 120 , and government motions to disagree . lords amendments 46 to 49 , and government motions to disagree . lords amendments 60 to 62 , and government motions to disagree . lords amendment 72 , and government motion to disagree . lords amendment 121 , and government motion to disagree . lords amendments 2 to 6 , 9 to 20 , 24 to 45 , 50 to 59 , 63 to 71 , 73 to 105 and 122 to 169 . it is a pleasure to make my first appearance at the dispatch box as secretary of state for business and trade to deliver the biggest improvements in workers ’ rights for a generation , as part of the labour government ’s employment rights bill , which formed a key plank of my party ’s manifesto commitments . i take this opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor , this is a landmark bill . it is pro - worker and pro - business , and it supports the government ’s objectives of boosting growth and improving living standards across the country . will the secretary of state give way ? so early on ! i will happily give way . i am grateful . the new secretary of state has been asked this several times , but we never heard an answer : can he point to a small or medium - sized business that actually supports this bill ? of course i can . many businesses have now come out in support of the bill . the hon . gentleman asked for a small business or a large business ; let me give him one of each . i have talked to small and medium - sized enterprises . r & w scott ltd , a leading uk manufacturer based in south lancashire specialising in high - quality ingredients for jams , came out in steadfast support . if the hon . gentleman wants to know of large businesses who back this bill , i could mention the co - op , centrica and richer sounds — all businesses that , as he will know , serve his community and his constituents . he should get behind those businesses in their support of the bill . i welcome the secretary of state to his new role . he will be aware — as will the minister of state , department for business and trade , i congratulate my hon . friend on being a champion for investment in our country , unlike the conservative party , which did down the country while it was in government , and is doing it down while in opposition , too . the task this government have set themself is formidable : to update employment law and make it fit for the age in which we live ; and to reward good employers , and ensure that the employment protections given by the best are extended to millions more workers . i have a letter from the hampshire chamber of commerce , which , the secretary of state will be pleased to hear , says that businesses are not opposed to all the changes that will be made to employment legislation , but it does focus on several areas of concern , such as the involvement of a tribunal in deciding whether an employee has been legitimately dismissed during their probation period , removing statutory sick pay waiting days , and changes to trade union recognition and industrial action thresholds . will the secretary of state do more to engage with chambers of commerce about these concerns ? i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman for his thoughtful contribution , and for reflecting the voice of chambers , who do an incredible job right around our country — and around the world . i say to the chambers , and to him , that the bill reflects the best standards that are already in use right around the country by the very best employers — indeed , by most employers . those employers have nothing to fear and a lot to gain from this legislation . on consultation , this is a government who listen constantly , and we will continue to listen . on those measures for which an implementation phase is really important , there are , unusually , formal consultations in which businesses can engage . this is a listening government and an acting government , and we will deliver on our manifesto commitments . we welcome many aspects of the legislation , but i put this question on behalf of my small businesses . they say that sickness absence costs them £ 3,500 a year — it costs some £ 5 billion across all the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland — and they are worried that the legislation could dramatically raise their fees and costs for the next year . how will this bill support small businesses that literally can not afford to pay sick pay as well as hire someone in the place of the sick ? that is a constructive question , and my small businesses need the answer . in all the front - bench jobs i have had , i have enjoyed my exchanges with the hon . gentleman , who is always constructive and well intentioned . i did not expect that we would enjoy that renewed relationship so soon in my new position . i say to him , and to the incredible businesses in his community , which i have had the pleasure of visiting , that a healthy workforce is a productive workforce . we intend to ensure the health and wellbeing of employees , and to ensure support for them in the workplace , structured in a way to get the very best out of them . that will be of benefit to employees , and certainly to employers as well . my right hon . friend will , without doubt , remember those dark days of covid , when people had to turn up in the workplace , despite being poorly . that contributed to the spread of the pandemic . does that not illustrate the need to ensure that when people are ill , they can rely on a sickness absence framework that supports them , and allows them to return to work when they have recovered ? my hon . friend makes an incredibly important point . both in times of crisis , such as during covid , and in good times , there are good employers and those who sometimes fall beneath standards . covid shone a light on the challenges that can be faced in the workforce . in those times , we needed to see the best from everyone . the majority of businesses supported their employees through that time of challenge . we want to ensure that the floor is high enough , and that the standards for every workforce are those that were set by the best , not by those who fell short of what we expect in britain in the 2020s . today , i ask the house to renew its commitment to this legislation . i will ask hon . members to endorse government amendments that seek to clarify and strengthen a number of measures , and to reject the amendments of conservative and liberal democrat peers who joined forces to undermine the progress that we are attempting to make . i make an exception of those in the other place who had the sincere aim of scrutinising , and who ensured that the bill was steered through the legislative process there with a steady hand . in opposition , those now in government probably rightly criticised the conservative government for introducing henry viii powers , yet the bill is absolutely riddled with them . does the secretary of state agree with the attorney general that such powers strike at the heart of the rule of law ? i agree that such powers need to be used wisely . the house will notice that many clauses provide for guidance in primary legislation during the implementation phase , and consultation with the businesses affected . members will have their voice heard , as will businesses and workers affected by the bill . during the passage of the bill through both houses , there have been improvements to the legislation , and i am grateful to members of both houses for their tireless work . the vast majority of the employment rights bill is very much to be welcomed . amendment 61 , which relates to heritage railways and heritage tramways , would allow people under the age of 16 to volunteer on those heritage railway lines . it has been so narrowly worded as to be specifically for those sectors , and it would give young people fantastic opportunities to learn about technology , to work across generations , and to contribute to their communities . will the government please consider it again ? i know that this is something that affects the community that right hon . lady represents , and that she is a tireless champion for her community here in parliament , via the all - party parliamentary group on heritage rail . i will come to that amendment specifically , so i think it is best that i leave the answer until then . if she wants to come back to me once she has heard the explanation as to why we will not support amendment 61 , i will happily take another intervention . i will start by speaking to the amendments that the government made in another place . the majority of them reinforce and strengthen existing measures in the bill by making technical adjustments . they close loopholes to safeguard policy functionality , resolve uncertainty and ensure that measures are comprehensive and effectively deliver the policy as intended , as set out by the plan to make work pay . some of the substantial amendments follow excellent campaigning by members of this house and the other place , and demonstrate that the government are listening and taking action , where appropriate . the government ’s amendments on zero - hours contracts strengthen and clarify provisions that were already in the bill when it left this place . our commitment to banning exploitative zero - hours contracts is the culmination of years of campaigning by labour mps , trade unions and the wider labour movement . for too long , these contracts have been used to replace full - time jobs . the government amendments tabled in the other place reflect our commitment to getting the detail right , and were informed by extensive engagement with a wide range of businesses , trade unions and other expert stakeholders . my husband suffered a catastrophic brain haemorrhage , which meant that he could not return to his work , but after he began to recover , he started to work again in another job , helped by a zero - hours contract . it meant that if he was not well enough to work , he could agree with his employer that his hours could be adjusted to suit . the practical and fair solution is to give staff a right to request a zero - hours contract , rather than replacing a requirement for businesses to offer a zero - hours contract . i hope that the hon . lady will pass on my sympathy and encouragement , and that of the whole house , to her husband , who has shown tenacity and resilience . i will come to the relevant part of the bill shortly but , in summary , we feel that putting the onus on employees to request , rather than on employers to deliver , such contracts would alienate several categories of workers , particularly younger workers and those with vulnerabilities . i will come to that in a minute , and it would be a delight to take any further interventions that she might have then . technical changes include clarification of how zero - hours contract provisions apply to agency workers ; reinforcement of the guaranteed hours provisions in relation to workers with annualised contracts and interaction with unfair dismissal ; refinement of the right to payment for short - notice provisions , in relation to when payments and notices of exemptions are due ; and expansion of those provisions to staff employed by both houses . together , these amendments strengthen the legislation by ensuring it is fair , proportionate and clear . on short - notice periods for zero - hour contracts , there was an opportunity in the house of lords to support the liberal democrat amendment that would require employers to give employees at least 48 hours ’ notice . labour peers voted against that amendment and the government have not come forward with an alternative , suggesting that it will take until 2027 before there will be consideration of those measures . will the minister explain why we will have to wait nearly three years before we can get a response to that ? the powers that the hon . gentleman refers to are strident powers . we have firmly committed to consulting on those powers and to reporting back , based on the outcome of the consultation , and that shows that we are listening . we will learn from the consultation and , if necessary , we will act . when the minister consults on those powers , will he include the agricultural sector ? with seasonal work , there is a big concern that employers will not necessarily have time to provide a notice period as the weather changes . on behalf of all our farmers , i ask him to consider that . as a member of parliament representing a constituency in the beautiful county of sussex , i am aware of the needs of seasonal workers , including those in the agricultural sector . we believe that the bill allows flexibility for that sector , but if the hon . lady would like to write to me with further updates , i am always willing to listen . on that point , will the minister give way ? let me make a little progress , then i will come back to the right hon . gentleman ; i am sure he will understand . we move on to bereavement leave . the bill will ensure that every employee has an immediate right to bereavement leave from the first day of employment . as both houses have agreed , bereavement is not an illness or a holiday , and it needs its own special category . the government amendments in the other place expand bereavement leave entitlement in the bill to include pregnancy loss occurring before 24 weeks . i pay tribute to all those who have campaigned on that change , such as the women and equalities committee — specifically my hon . friend i give way to let me take the secretary of state back to zero - hours contracts . the seasonality of the hospitality industry and , indeed , boat building down in my constituency , where large numbers of students are taken on , means that scheduling for guaranteed hours is very difficult , particularly when those students benefit from the provision , because they want to partake in races and other seasonal activities of a leisure nature . i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman for raising his concerns in this area . i represent a constituency in brighton and hove that has a vibrant hospitality and night - time economy and two universities , so i have paid particularly close attention to these issues . i reassure him that the bill refers to exploitative zero - hours contracts . it is clear that some people will want employment on different terms , and we have flexibility in the bill for those circumstances . where there is exploitation or the potential for it — which surely we all agree exists in the economy at the present time — we should act against those sorts of things . in the positive spirit in which the secretary of state speaks , will he commit on the floor of the house that the reference period used to calculate hours for sectors that have serious seasonality — we have heard about boat building , hospitality , tourism and farming — will not be a ridiculously short period , such as 12 weeks ? will it be long enough to reflect the seasonal nature of that type of work ? i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman for the passion with which he speaks . that is a very important point , and that is why we are consulting on the time threshold ; we want to get it right . as my predecessors and i have said repeatedly , this bill is good for workers and good for business , and that is the spirit in which we will continue . let me move on to fire and rehire , on which hon . members will know there has been a long - running campaign led by trade unions . the provisions in the bill will ensure that employers are no longer able to use cruel fire and rehire practices . no longer will unscrupulous employers be able to fire employees to replace them on low pay . the bill also ensures protection for employees replaced by non - employee workers , such as agency staff , to do the same role . as we said in our manifesto , these reforms are a pro - business , pro - worker set of measures . they strike a balance , curbing misuse while allowing fair businesses time for adaptation . this bill will make work fairer for thousands in my constituency . however , my constituents are worried that conservative members seek to water down this legislation . can the secretary of state confirm that the government will resist their attempts and are committed to introducing the bill in full ? i understand that there will be workers around the country who are worried about the watering down of such legislation . i reassure my hon . friend that as long as they vote labour , that will never happen . in the other place , the government made amendments to strengthen protections for social care workers and school support staff , ensuring that workers whose employers go above and beyond the minimum standards set out by the negotiating bodies will have those better terms protected . on that point , will the secretary of state give way ? how could i resist such an invitation ? as a former schoolteacher and leader , i know the value of support staff and how critical they are , but does the secretary of state agree that lords amendment 121 is unnecessary ? the bill already ensures that no negotiating body can prevent employers from offering better terms and conditions where they wish to do so . the school support staff negotiating body was regrettably abolished in 2010 , but this government will reinstate it . the amendment would add needless bureaucracy and would risk impeding the flexibility that schools and staff rightly expect . my hon . friend has demonstrated many things in that intervention , including what a great teacher she was . as a former chair of governors and a governor of a couple of schools , i can assure her that i too understand the value of teaching assistants and all those who support the education of young people . i agree that the bill gets the balance right — that is why we are proceeding as we are . i turn to the lords amendments dealing with the international maritime provisions . the government amendment clarifies that a regulation to implement future agreements may not be brought into force before the agreement is ratified , but by implication , such regulations may be made before it is ratified . this will allow the uk to meet its international obligations by ensuring such regulations can be made ahead of the deadline for bringing them into force . the fair work agency provisions will establish a single body to enforce a wide range of employment rights . the government amendments are technical refinements to improve enforcement and co - ordination . they clarify definitions of “ worker ” and “ employer ” , enable summary sheriffs in scotland to act on underpayment notices , and refine provisions on data sharing between enforcement bodies . the amendments will ensure that the fair work agency can operate smoothly and effectively . in another place , the government also made an amendment to change the time limit in the occupational and personal pension schemes ( consultation by employers and miscellaneous amendment ) regulations 2006 from three months to six months , ensuring consistency with wider employment tribunal time limit reforms . amendments were made in another place to the trade union provisions . the government have refined the provisions on trade union recognition by adding sanctions for non - compliance , requiring timely sharing of worker data , and tightening timelines to protect bargaining units . together , these amendments enhance fairness , transparency and enforceability in trade union recognition . i now turn to non - disclosure agreements . the government are committed to ending the misuse of ndas , which silence victims of sexual harassment , discrimination and bullying . i thank members of this house and those in another place for their work on this issue , as well as zelda perkins , the founder of ca n’t buy my silence , for her tireless campaigning , and my right hon . friend i am sure all members of the house would like to note that zelda perkins joins us in the under - gallery today , and to thank her for her tireless work in campaigning on this issue . the road map for implementation of this legislation was published before the government tabled their amendments , so will the secretary of state confirm when he will commence consultation , and when the government are aiming for this primary legislation to commence so that the ban on ndas can come into force ? it is great to know that zelda is in the chamber with us today , and that my right hon . friend is also in the chamber to give voice to so many campaigners and the work she has done . the prime minister has confirmed that the road map remains as is . in another place , we made two amendments to strengthen the provisions in the bill that protect victims , while preserving ndas to protect legitimate business interests . the new clause will allow workers to speak freely about their experiences and allow those who have witnessed misconduct or have knowledge of it to call it out by voiding a non - disclosure agreement that has been used to try to silence victims . the government will consult on related secondary legislation before commencing the measure . the government propose two new amendments . the first will extend the scope of the clause to include staff of both houses . we are proposing that change following discussions with parliamentary authorities . the second amendment is designed to give disabled workers more protection . it will extend the scope of relevant discrimination to include a failure to make reasonable adjustments for disabled persons under section 21 of the equality act 2010 . that will ensure that all forms of harassment and discrimination in the equality act are covered . i will now set out the government ’s position on the 28 non - government amendments made to the bill in the other place , which cover 12 policy areas . lords amendment 1 addresses provisions on zero - hours contracts and seeks to change the onus from the employer to the employee on the right to guaranteed hours . the amendment shifts it from a duty on employers to offer guaranteed hours to qualifying workers to a model where employees must actively request them . the government believe that the duty to offer guaranteed hours should lie with the employer . a right - to - request model could create undesirable barriers , making it especially difficult for vulnerable workers on exploitative zero - hours contracts to access their right to guaranteed hours , especially as many such workers are younger and may be in their first job . as of june 2025 , approximately 480,000 people in employment aged 16 to 24 are on zero - hours contracts . that is out of a total of 1.18 million workers on zero - hours contracts overall . our position strikes a fair balance between protection and choice . for that reason , the government do not support the amendment . i think we have a difference in how we look at lords amendment 1 . it does not water down the bill ; it adds more flexibility so that people get the opportunity to have the kind of employment that works for them . that is particularly important in an environment where we are trying to get people off disability benefits and back into work . i am grateful for the hon . member ’s thoughtful intervention . i still believe that in order to exercise rights , people have to know that they exist . the majority of people — young people in particular — entering the workforce in such numbers via zero - hours contracts simply would not know that those rights exist for them . by changing the onus so it is on employers , it clarifies the rights they have and ensures that every workplace must offer equal access to employment hours . this bill includes flexibilities , and i think those will encompass the situations over which she has legitimate concern . lords amendments 7 and 8 seek to provide that a short - notice cancellation payment is due only where the shift is cancelled less than 48 hours before it is due to start . the government intend to set out short notice period regulations following a consultation . i know that 48 hours seems a long time to some ministers , but does he agree that having a shift cancelled at short notice would be bad news for many workers across the country ? this bill should be amended to specify an acceptable notice period . i think the bill gets the balance right . for most people in most workplaces , 48 hours is a long time , although i have witnessed some speeches in this place that have been a lot shorter than that , but seemed a lot longer — perhaps the one currently unfolding is an example . the consultation will determine a fair short notice period that works for businesses and workers . putting the implementation detail in regulations will retain the flexibility to respond to changing circumstances . the government have already stated in the bill that “ short notice ” will not be more than seven days , and we are committed to continuing to work closely with businesses and trade unions and considering carefully the right approach to this matter . that is why the government will be rejecting the amendment . lords amendment 21 would give employees who are special constables the right to reasonable time off to carry out their police duties . this government recognise the value and the role of special constables in keeping our communities safe , a role that has been highlighted by the campaign led by the association of special constabulary officers and in the amendment originally tabled in the house of commons by today we are proposing an amendment in lieu to make a statutory commitment to undertake a full review of the list of duties captured under section 50 of the employment rights act 1996 , and to publish a summary of the findings of the review within 12 months , with specific reference to special constables . the review is already under way , which reflects our commitment to acting swiftly and transparently on this important matter following the strong case made in both houses and the cross - party engagement on the issue , for which we are grateful . the review will assess whether the current list of public duties qualifying for time off remains fit for purpose , and will consider the inclusion of additional roles such as that of special constables . that approach ensures that any changes are informed by robust evidence and stakeholder input . lords amendments 23 and 106 to 120 seek to reduce the qualifying period for unfair dismissal from two years to six months , while preserving existing exemptions . the government do not support the amendments . we were elected on a manifesto to provide protection from unfair dismissal from day one of employment . i am grateful to the secretary of state for giving way ; he is being very generous . can he explain why , before he took up his present post and took responsibility for the bill , no assessment was made of the hiring practices that would occur if the unfair dismissal period was reduced from two years ? why was no modelling done ? it is in the labour party manifesto , but where is the evidence of what it will do to jobs and economy ? that is what my constituents are concerned about . of course many of the hon . gentleman ’s constituents will be concerned about their workforce protections , and those who are setting up , running and managing businesses will want us to get the balance right as well , but we have many years of experience that have informed the decisions we have taken , and our engagement with trade unions and other bodies has ensured that we have got that balance right . i am glad that the secretary of state has mentioned trade unions , because that allows me a moment to return to his earlier point about banning fire and rehire . in july , the general secretary of unite said that what birmingham was proposing for its bin workers was fire and rehire . if this labour government do not like the idea of fire and rehire , when will they tell their colleagues in birmingham about that ? i think that the hon . gentleman is making an argument for the bill . we want to ensure that every employer in the country has the same legislative framework in which to operate . will the secretary of state give way ? i will , but i must alert all members to the fact that i want to have time to listen to their own speeches , so i shall be rattling through from now on . what can the secretary of state say to those in the boatbuilding industry who have made representations to me about protection from day one ? when someone takes on a craftsman , it can take quite a long time to establish whether he is any good and up to the job . the reassurance that i give is that we will implement this policy , having listened to employers . we will make sure that the rights to which we have committed in our manifesto are fully upheld . what employers want is to have workers who are fully committed to their life in the workplace . if employees feel that they have an unreasonable sword of damocles over their head , employers will not get the best productivity out of those workers . will the secretary of state give way ? i am going to make some progress . we have said explicitly that our intention is to provide a less onerous approach for businesses to follow in order to dismiss someone during the statutory probation period for reasons to do with their performance and suitability for the role . the government are committed to undertaking a public consultation to get the details of the statutory probation period right , to keep it light touch and to get the standards right . most employers who use contractual probation periods operate them for six months or less . the government ’s preference is for the statutory probation period to be nine months long . that will enable an employer to operate a basic six - month probation period , with an option for extension where employers wish to give their employees further time to improve their performance . we will consult on the duration , which is why the government will not agree to lords amendments 23 and 106 to 120 . lords amendment 48 seeks to impose a duty on the secretary of state to have regard to the requirements for seasonal workers when making regulations . the government do not believe the amendment is necessary , because the bill already reflects the realities of seasonal work . for example , it allows guaranteed offers for limited - term contracts where appropriate , such as for task - based or time - bound roles . this government do not believe the amendment is necessary , as the approach taken in the bill already protects seasonal jobs while ensuring fair rights for workers , which is why the government decline to support this amendment . lords amendment 49 seeks to require a consultation on the effects of provisions in part 1 , and to ensure that at least 500 small and medium - sized businesses are included in the consultation . smes are the backbone of the british economy , and their insights are vital to shaping policy that works in practice . that is why our approach to the implementation of the bill includes 13 targeted consultations , running through to 2026 . we think it is more effective and proportionate for us to engage extensively with smes , as planned through the consultation that we have described in our road map , and to ensure that smes ’ views help shape the implementation . given the comprehensive process , the government consider that the amendment must be rejected . lords amendment 46 would have the effect of requiring the secretary of state to make regulations within six months to extend the circumstances in which an employee is automatically considered to have been unfairly dismissed for whistleblowing . it would require certain employers to take responsible steps to investigate whistleblowing claims . the government do not support the amendment . we recognise that the whistleblowing framework in the employment rights act 1996 may not be operating as effectively as it should be , but we believe that any reform should be considered as part of a broader assessment of that framework . that is why the government consider that the amendment must be rejected . lords amendment 47 would insert a new clause into the bill that relates to workplace representation . the amendment would allow workers and employees to be accompanied at grievance hearings by a certified professional companion . the law already guarantees workers the right to be accompanied at a disciplinary or grievance hearing by a fellow worker , a trade union representative or an official employed by a trade union . employers may allow other companions to attend formal meetings on a discretionary basis . the current law has served workers and employees for well over two decades . it strikes the right balance between fairness , flexibility and practicality , and we believe it should remain this way . lords amendment 60 seeks to remove the restrictions on young people aged 14 to 16 working on a heritage railway or a heritage tramway from the meaning of “ employment in an industrial undertaking ” . the government do not believe that this amendment is necessary . the benefits of youth volunteering in heritage railways can not be overestimated and , with proper health and safety management , it already works well . the employment of women , young persons , and children act 1920 does not ban youth volunteering in appropriate roles on heritage railways . well - run schemes , such as the one in swanage , show that young people can still take part safely and legally . i politely remind the secretary of state that he is therefore advising heritage railways to in effect break the law , because that is how the law stands . if parents or a local authority were to bring an action against a heritage railway , it would find itself in such a position . if he can not change that in this legislation , i really urge him to discuss with me how to bring this forward in another way . this matter has been the source of a lot of consternation and examination in my department . i assure the right hon . member that we have looked very closely at it and believe that the existing law is fit for purpose in this case . we will proceed on that basis , but as she will have found during the time we have both been in this place , i am always happy to sit down with her , and especially , being so new in the job , so to learn about that specific case . however , we will proceed in that way because the advice is very clear on this matter . lords amendments 61 and 72 seek to remove clause 59 relating to trade union political funds from the bill . clause 59 reverses the changes introduced by the trade union act 2016 , reinstating arrangements whereby union members are automatically opted in to contribute to political funds , unless they choose to opt out . this is a key step in lifting the burden of the 2016 act and returning to a long - standing precedent that worked for 70 years . removing clause 59 would break a clear government commitment , which is why the government consider that lords amendment 61 should be rejected . lords amendment 62 seeks to remove clause 65(2 ) from the bill , the effect of which would be to retain the 50 % turnout threshold requirement for industrial action ballots . the government do not support this amendment . the bill brings union democracy into line with other democratic mandates , including votes in this parliament and elections for each and every one of us . clause 65 is a step towards fairness and consistency in how we respect collective voices , which is why this government consider that the amendment must be rejected . lords amendment 121 is another duplicate amendment . we agree that the school support staff negotiating body should not block employers that wish to go further than the minimum terms and conditions , but that is already stipulated in the bill . the amendment duplicates the effect of proposed new section 148m(6)(b ) , which is why the government will be rejecting the amendment . i urge members to support the government amendments before the house , including the amendments in lieu in relation to the extension of rights to time off for special constables . we have listened throughout the bill ’s passage , and we have made meaningful changes where needed , including on bereavement leave and non - disclosure arrangements . we will continue to listen in relation to the further work to be undertaken when implementing the bill . the employment rights bill is a major step forward in modernising protections and delivering on our commitment to make work pay . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to speak on the bill , and i will now allow others to speak . i call the shadow secretary of state . i welcome the new secretary of state to his place , and congratulate him as well as the hon . members for halifax ( kate dearden ) and for rhondda and ogmore ( chris bryant ) on their appointments . his is a vital role in government , and it will surely be a delight and a privilege for him to champion our hard - working , innovative businesses in cabinet and on the world stage as president of the board of trade . i particularly welcome his comments that the government ’s priority must be to “ double down ” on growth and position themselves as “ an active partner that delivers success , supports new business and backs wealth creation . ” where he does that , he can be assured of our support , but if that is really his view , we should not be debating this bill today and the government should never have brought it forward . in fact , i well understand why ministers may well be concerned about job insecurity and last - minute shift cancellations . after all , their predecessors , this is the wrong bill at the wrong moment . rather than proceed with a bill which , on the government ’s own assessment , will reduce employment and growth , now is the time to put the national interest first . but they can not do that . the secretary of state can not do what he himself believes , because they are too weak . they have a prime minister who is incapable of providing the leadership we need at this time . in time , they will come to realise that this is a moment they walked themselves to the end of a plank with an anchor tied around their feet . the business world is watching today in disbelief . only last week , it was reported that hiring demand among british employers has fallen to a new low , with the uk recording one of the sharpest slowdowns in recruitment in the world . the number of unemployed has risen by around 200,000 people already on the government ’s watch . the institute of directors reports that business confidence has fallen to its lowest point in two years . the chancellor has declined to repeat her clear assurance , given previously to the cbi , that the government will not come forward “ with more borrowing or more taxes ” . there is a backlog at the employment tribunal — the secretary of state did not it mention once — of 491,000 open cases at the last count . the five largest business organisations , almost without precedent , have written jointly that the bill will have “ deeply damaging implications for the government ’s priority growth mission ” . we have just heard the secretary of state reject even the amendments that might have mitigated the worst of the harm . these are not unreasonable amendments ; they are not partisan amendments . almost all have cross - party support , including from the government ’s own party in the other place . they are the result of consultation with business , and careful consideration and weeks of debate in the other place . it will be a bad day for democracy if right hon . and hon . members vote against them today . before they have to account to their constituents , i strongly urge them to study exactly what it is they will be voting against . lords amendment 23 and amendments 106 to 120 have a core purpose of stopping this country slipping into the rates of youth unemployment seen in other european countries , where getting a first chance feels more like a lottery than a smooth passage into the workforce . labour members often like to cast themselves as the party of social mobility , but the reality is that if they remove probation periods — the chance for an employer to take a chance on somebody — they will kill social mobility . the debates in the other place highlighted the impact of not having a qualifying period not just on businesses , but the police and gps . no proposal has been accepted by the government that reconciles the promise to introduce a day one right to claim unfair dismissal with a commitment to a light - touch process for probation . at this stage , the only way to avoid undermining the government ’s 80 % employment target is to accept the lords amendment that reduces that period . does the shadow minister understand the difference between fair dismissal and unfair dismissal ? the shadow minister absolutely understands that . he does so and understands the implication of clause 23 from having spoken to make uk , the cbi , the institute of directors , the british chambers of commerce and the federation of small businesses , all of whom urge the government to rethink on this clause . business does not recognise a process that ends in a full legal tribunal , flanked by lawyers , after typically a two - year wait and lost management time , as light - touch . legal fees alone for defending an unfair dismissal case range from £ 15,000 to £ 20,000 . does the hon . gentleman not recognise that very few cases end up in a tribunal , particularly at a point where all due process happens ? not all dismissals are unfair . of course not all dismissals are unfair , but if it was not a process that ended up in court or in a tribunal , we would not be facing a backlog of 491,000 individuals with current open cases — by the government ’s own figures — and business organisations would not be citing legal fees in that order of magnitude . one reason that so many of those cases do not end up in a tribunal is that businesses , cognisant of the loss of management time and £ 15,000 to £ 20,000 in fees , simply pay up rather than contest . my right hon . friend , with his experience , is exactly right . just think about the impact on a small business of a fee of that magnitude and the length of time it takes to get justice . what is going to happen ? this is a really important point . those on the government benches will be living this reality over the remainder of their term , and they will have to account for it . businesses will be discouraged from hiring anybody without a perfect cv and a proven track record of work . who are we talking about ? we are talking about young people , people with dyslexia and related conditions , and people with a period of inactivity on their cvs — such as former prisoners seeking a second chance to go straight . those will be the victims of that particular measure . labour ministers should realise that they will be the first victims of disagreeing with lords amendment 62 . the long - standing principle here is a simple one : we should not be allowing strikes to be called when a majority of union members have not even voted , let alone voted in favour . a strike could still proceed with just over a quarter of those eligible . opposing this amendment will guarantee that unions are held hostage by a militant minority who force strikes even when the union ’s own members do not support one . we can ill afford more strikes that crush growth , prevent workers from getting to work and endanger lives , and the public will not forget the change that this government seek to make . amendment 61 is a cross - bench lords amendment that would maintain a consensus arrived at by the trade union political funds and political party funding committee — that only those who actively choose to contribute to a political fund opt in to do so . this is a basic principle that the government have applied to services everywhere else in the economy , from beauty boxes , gyms and meditation apps to netflix and newspaper subscriptions . why should britain ’s workers not enjoy the same right ? the only conceivable reason — it brings shame on anyone who votes against the amendment — is to swell the coffers of one political party . lords amendment 47 , on the right to be accompanied , tries to finally level the playing field for the 80 % of workers who are not in a union , but should have the same rights as trade union members to be supported in a disciplinary or grievance hearing . by voting against this modest but important reform , labour is preserving what is essentially a closed shop that unions use to push people who do not want to join into doing so . we scrapped the closed shop decades ago , and no one should be bringing it back as a means of pressuring vulnerable workers into paying into union coffers . will the hon . member give way ? i will happily give way if the hon . gentleman will talk about the other organisations that will do a brilliant job of representing employees . well , that would n’t be the tory party , would it , madam deputy speaker ? what the shadow secretary of state seems not to understand is that workers can not turn up to a trade union and go , “ i ’ve got a problem . can i join and get representation , please ? ” . almost every union in this country requires a qualifying period to get the representation he talks about — the idea that this is a closed shop is just nonsense . the hon . member has probably wilfully misinterpreted what i said . i am talking about the right for individuals to be represented by a trade union or by a qualified professional from another domain , such as a qualified lawyer . will the shadow secretary of state give way ? of course i will give way to the hon . gentleman — we are missing him already . i am glad to be back . the shadow secretary of state just talked about legal fees for firms when it comes to defending tribunal cases . if the right to be accompanied is expanded to include lawyers , the response of firms will be , “ we had better get a lawyer too ” , and that will just put up costs , will it not ? the hon . member has done a great deal of work on the bill , and it is a great shame that he was cut short in his prime , but with respect the point is about choice for the individual . in many cases , the long - standing right will be to be represented by a trade union , but it could also be a mediator or a qualified professional in any other domain . the point is not to extinguish that choice , which is absolutely — he will know this — what the amendment would do . the bill — from a government who in too many domains are now tolerant of a two - tier system — creates a two - tier system for workers ’ rights . lords amendment 1 is a typical example of where the government do not understand or have failed to listen to businesses , particularly hospitality and seasonal businesses . what started as an attempt to ban zero - hours contracts has morphed into a chain around the necks of both employers and workers . the government will no doubt cry about unintended consequences when the time comes , but i can tell them now that the consequences will be clear , and a cacophony of business groups such as uk hospitality , the british retail consortium and the federation of small businesses have explained this precisely to them . i gently say that if the government feel so strongly about zero - hours contracts , the best way of putting their own house in order would be to start with tackling precisely those that operate in the armed forces reserves . lords amendment 48 would protect the countless businesses across the country that rely directly on seasonal work . from the coasts of devon and cornwall to great yarmouth , and from the secretary of state ’s and my own county of sussex to ayrshire , there are millions of workers employed in seasonal industries . seasonal work often takes place in communities that are heavily reliant on tourism , both foreign and domestic , and that are competing in a competitive international market . the government have already taken an axe to the hospitality and retail industries with the removals of relief . the amendment would be a very good way of going in some direction to support them . in opposing lords amendment 49 , the government are showing their commitment to ignore small business above all others . the secretary of state says that he wants to listen to businesses , and i take him at his word , but why then oppose this amendment , which would codify precisely that ? countless small business will have a real challenge in dealing with this bill , which is now 330 pages of red tape . why on earth would the government put their members through the lobby to oppose listening and consulting with small businesses ? we support lords amendment 60 , which has cross - party support , at the behest of millions of those who enjoy heritage railway attractions . if the secretary of state has not yet made it to the amberley museum , which is not that far from his constituency—[interruption . ] he knows of it ? well , he is welcome to come and visit and listen to how the volunteers who are gaining valuable experience will be affected . i am perplexed about why the government are so opposed to lords amendment 46 on the protection of whistleblowers . it is genuinely confusing . time and again ministers on both sides of this house have come to the dispatch box to talk about government scandals . we have seen brave people in organisations try to speak up and raise their concerns , only to have them dismissed . the government claim that the bill is about workers ’ rights yet seem to have zero interest in protecting workers who try to reveal serious problems in the private and public sectors . i urge all colleagues to read that for themselves and to make up their own minds on where they think the right place to be is . good luck to those who vote against that entirely reasonable amendment , which would protect people who do the right thing , and then have to try to explain to their constituents why they did so . the conservatives remain firmly opposed to all the damaging measures in the bill , which we have fought at every reading . we will reverse its most destructive measures , because we want to get more young people into work and we believe that the bill will do precisely the opposite . this bill is not really about workers ’ rights , because the majority of its clauses relate to trade union rights . i hope that labour members will properly declare their interests when they rise to speak . workers have nothing to gain from more strikes and more disruption lasting longer and with shorter notice periods . their lives will not be improved by policing banter in pubs or having their wages defaulted into political funds for far - left causes . above all , more rights on paper help no one who has not got a job . we understand the fundamental truth that it is the private sector that creates growth and that businesses create jobs , and that it is the socialism we see from labour that kills them . these are reasonable amendments . the bill has had a great deal of scrutiny in the other house . i believe the secretary of state is sincere in wanting growth in our economy and showing business that he does understand it , but rather than reading out the script that officials wrote for him , he ought to be standing up and talking about the amendments that he will support . the opposition will always act in the national interest , which is why we will support the lords amendments . i draw attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests , which includes an election donation from the union of shop , distributive and allied workers and my membership of the unite and gmb unions . i welcome the bill ’s return to the house and the opportunity to consider the amendments made in the other place . i also welcome the new secretary of state to his place and thank him for his kind words . i also welcome the under - secretary of state for business and trade , my hon . friend i am speaking a few rows back from where i had expected to be today . the shadow secretary of state mentioned getting a short - notice cancellation payment — i am afraid that has not winged its way to me yet . however , i am delighted to be speaking in any capacity , because this bill really is what a labour government should be delivering on . i was able , alongside my right hon . friends the members for ashton - under - lyne ( angela rayner ) and for stalybridge and hyde ( jonathan reynolds ) , to take the new deal for working people — a policy programme carefully developed in opposition — and turn it into legislation that was laid before the house within 100 days of taking office , as we promised we would . while i started my ministerial role as i ended it — fired with enthusiasm — my hopes for the meaningful change that the bill can deliver remain undimmed . that we are here entering the bill ’s final stages is testament to the hard work and dedication of those who developed the policy programme both in opposition and in government . i place on record my thanks to those in the department for business and trade who helped shape those manifesto commitments into the bill . i also pay tribute to baroness jones of whitchurch , who did a sterling job of guiding the legislation through the other place amid intense scrutiny and opposition , which of course we will talk about . i will not go through every lords amendment ; i will just pick out a few of those i consider to be most damaging and undermining of the intentions that we set out in our manifesto about how we will rebalance the workplace to make it work for ordinary people . first , lords amendment 1 completely undermines the principle , set out in our manifesto , of banning exploitative zero - hours contracts . the amendment would water down the commitment we gave to provide workers with an offer of a guaranteed - hours contract to a right to request guaranteed hours . there has long been a misunderstanding — perhaps a wilful misunderstanding — of how the policy operates . it does not prevent those who want to remain on zero - hours contracts from continuing to do so , and neither does it prevent employers from hiring seasonal workers . it simply provides the opportunity for those who want certainty about the hours they work , week to week and month to month , to have guaranteed hours . we understand that not everyone will take advantage of that , but it might just be a lifeline for those who struggle to balance fixed costs such as bills , housing and childcare by taking out the stress of the potential variations that we see so often in zero - hours contracts at the moment . this is a very good thing for the government to be doing , because one of the key principles in the bill is the need to restore security and dignity at work , which would be damaged by the amendment . i understand that the noble lords argued that the wording of the amendment would prevent employers from rejecting guaranteed - hours requests . it is presented as a reasonable compromise that achieves the same outcome , maintaining workers ’ rights to guaranteed hours while removing the employer ’s requirement to make offers . i disagree with that analysis . it shifts the right from one that is passively applied to one that has to be actively invoked by workers . this means that an individual would have to know their rights and have the confidence to approach their employer in order to benefit from them . as the secretary of state said , those working on zero - hours contracts are some of the least empowered workers in this country , their contracts are inherently precarious , and those working on them are more likely to be younger , working part time and in low - paid sectors . there are plenty of examples out there of how the allocation of hours has been used by management as a tool of control and , in some cases , a tool of abuse . the bill already sets out a number of anti - avoidance measures , because we know that that massive power imbalance has to be addressed , and this amendment would fatally undermine all that good work . i have similar concerns about lords amendments 6 and 7 , which seek to impose 48 hours as a reasonable notice period . if passed , these amendments would remove any chance for workers or employers to make representations in a consultation process , and instead force an arbitrary cut - off of 48 hours . throughout my time as a minister , we were committed to consulting widely on changes and incorporating the feedback we received into our approach . i remember the conservatives complaining during the original passage of the bill that we were not consulting enough , yet now they lend their support to amendments that would chop that consultation off entirely . that said , i must welcome the comments from opposition front benchers in the other place , who indicated that they supported the principle of compensation for cancelled or curtailed shifts . i note that lord hunt of wirral said : “ we are fully in agreement that workers deserve reasonable notice of shifts . that is a fair and modern expectation . ”—[official report , house of lords , quite how that fits with the tory pledge to scrap the entire bill , i do not know . of course , it is to be expected , as night follows day , that they will object to measures that improve the rights of working people , but that would mean scrapping things that i thought even they supported , including ending non - disclosure agreements for victims of sexual harassment , a new right for bereavement leave for those who have suffered a pregnancy loss , and finally an end to fire and rehire , which they did so much to condemn while in government but did nothing of substance to deal with . that is the conservative position on this , and it is something that the british people will completely and wholeheartedly reject . lords amendment 23 relates to unfair dismissal , which is something i know rather a lot about . it seeks to impose a six - month qualifying period for unfair dismissal rights rather than day one rights , which everyone on the labour benches has campaigned for . this is another brazen attempt by the other place to remove a clear manifesto commitment . i and other labour members were elected on a mandate to introduce basic rights , including unfair dismissal rights , from day one . how can we allow people who essentially have a job for life to prevent millions of people in this country from getting basic employment protections on day one ? it is fundamentally wrong that workers can currently be treated so disposably , and that they can be dismissed arbitrarily with no legal recourse for two years . this is about fairness . a worker deserves to be treated with dignity , fairness and respect , no matter how long they have worked for an employer . i commend my hon . friend for the work that he has done and that the department continues to do on this . one of the interesting things about this provision is that , in 2013 , the conservatives changed the period from 12 months to 24 months . they increased the amount of time that people were in an insecure position in the workplace . it is essential that we support working families and working people , so does he agree that this is absolutely the right step forward ? i certainly do . in my conversations with employers , i did not come across any who were prepared to defend the status quo of a two - year qualifying period for unfair dismissal , because they recognise that is an awfully long time to be in employment without any protection at all . the government are sensitive to concerns about hiring , however , and we have included provisions in the bill to establish a statutory probationary period during which an employee ’s performance and suitability can be established , and a lighter - touch dismissal procedure will apply during that time . this will mean that , to coin a phrase , if a new hire is not working out , an employer will be able to follow a lighter - touch procedure to dismiss them fairly . but crucially , there will still have to be a process ; there can not be an arbitrary dismissal without explanation , as happens far too often now . we know that recruiting someone is an expensive and time - consuming business , if it is done properly , so why would we not expect the same care and attention to be put into determining whether someone had a future in the business at all ? this country , to our shame , has one of the least regulated approaches to dismissal protection in the oecd , leaving an estimated 9 million workers vulnerable to dismissals without protections . how can someone plan their life , make financial commitments and so forth if they can be sacked at the drop of a hat ? we believe that this must change . people deserve greater security and dignity at work , and they deserve to be treated fairly , not just as disposable commodities . this bill strikes the right balance , and although much of the detail is to be determined by consultation and regulations — i will come back to that later — it sends an important message that we will not accept the race to the bottom any more and that dignity and security at work start from day one . that is the lodestone of what a labour government should be about . i am delighted that the bill is on track to become law in a matter of weeks . it is a landmark piece of legislation that will end the race to the bottom and provide the biggest uplift in workers ’ rights in a generation . we on the labour side have long been clear that it will benefit everyone across the country . it will be good for workers and it will be good for businesses . passing this bill is not , of course , the end of the matter . there is so much more that needs to be done outside the bill , particularly on finally ending the industrial - scale exploitation that is bogus self - employment . we can not have a bill that massively increases protections for millions of people at work but fails to address the growing scandal of a deliberate manipulation of the law to deny people the same basic protections . over the coming years , there will be a range of secondary legislation , codes of practice and guidance issued to implement the bill ’s provisions . i wish the new minister every success in working through and navigating the 80 or so statutory instruments that will be needed to ensure that the bill is implemented in full and that we stick to the road map that was published earlier in the summer . i welcome the secretary of state ’s comment that the road map remains in place in full . however , given the volume and complexity of all this — the details of the consultations , the scope of the regulations , the language in the codes of practice and even the commencement dates — it goes without saying that there are plenty of opportunities for those who do not want to see workers ’ rights improved in this country to chip away at the strong baseline that the bill represents , and of course it is far easier to do that in some stuffy committee room away from the main chamber . i do not think that is the minister ’s intention , but i am not sure that everyone shares our enthusiasm for improving the rights of millions of working people , so we will all be looking at this closely and encouraging the minister to keep to our manifesto commitments that we all believe so strongly in . on that point , i know how enthusiastic labour members are about the bill , and how enthusiastic many of the people we represent are about it , so let us see that enthusiasm replicated across the whole of government . what better way to demonstrate that we are still the party of working people , and what better way to show that democratic politics can still make a difference than by championing the many ways that this bill will improve people ’s lives ? from the shop worker on a zero - hours contract who for the first time will have a right to guaranteed hours , to the social care assistant whose voice will finally be heard through a national negotiating body , to the warehouse operative who will be able to have a trade union collectively bargain on their behalf , this bill can be the antidote to the politics of division and despair . let us not be timid in our backing of improved employment rights . let us not apologise for at last restoring balance to the workplace . let us be confident , and committed to all the good things the bill can achieve , and let us shout them from the rooftops . this bill is labour at its best . it shows us what can be done when the broadest experiences and the voices of our movement are harnessed together to deliver change . i am proud that i played my part in that , and i will do all i can to ensure that we deliver on the promises we made to the british people to truly make sure that work pays . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . it is a pleasure to follow the liberal democrats support many of the bill ’s aims . we have long called for employment rights to be strengthened in several ways , including by boosting statutory sick pay , strengthening support for whistleblowers and increasing support for carers . there is a lot in the bill that we support in principle , and that moves the country in the right direction . however , we remain concerned about how many of the measures will be implemented . we must ensure that the legislation strikes the right balance for both employees and business . some of our worries arose from the extent to which crucial detail has been left to secondary legislation , or will be subject to consultations . that does not facilitate stability and certainty for business or workers , and it precludes long - term planning . that will particularly impact small businesses , start - up businesses and those businesses looking to grow . that is why we are supportive of , for example , the amendment that sets the qualifying period for unfair dismissal claims at six months ; that would create certainty for business . any new measures to support workers must go hand in hand with much - needed reforms to support our small businesses , which provide employment . those reforms include reform of the broken business rates system , a removal of trade barriers , and proper reform of the apprenticeship levy . i am in favour of lords amendment 1 , which would change the obligation to offer guaranteed hours to a right to request them . the liberal democrats have long stood for giving zero - hours workers security about their working patterns , and we are deeply concerned that too many zero - hours workers struggle with unstable incomes , job insecurity and difficulties in planning for the future . however , we also recognise that many value the flexibility that such arrangements provide . many young people and those balancing caring responsibilities alongside work value adaptability in their shift patterns . it is therefore important to strike a balance that ensures that workers can have security and flexibility . i spoke to a hospital catering worker in my constituency who was contracted to work 12 hours a week , but she regularly worked 36 hours a week . however , when she took annual leave , she was paid for 12 hours a week . does the hon . lady not think that this catering worker deserves the respect of actually being paid for the hours she works , and of having a contract for the hours she works ? if the hon . lady supported lords amendment 1 , the catering worker would have a right to request , and could get the certainty she requires . the amendment would very much offer that right , which she currently does not have , but it would also mean there was no requirement on the employer to maintain records , and the employer would not have the administrative burden of being forced to offer those hours to workers in the industry who did not require such flexibility . that is why we think the amendment strikes the right balance . we strongly support the principle of enabling workers to obtain fixed - hours contracts , but we have concerns about the implementation method proposed in the bill . small businesses have highlighted that having to offer employees fixed - hours contracts on a rolling basis could impose significant administrative burdens . many small employers lack human resource or legal departments , and the change could be a significant cost for those with limited resources . that would compound other challenges , such as the recent increase in employers ’ national insurance contributions and the fallout from the previous government ’s damaging brexit deal . in the retail and hospitality sector , part - time and entry - level roles are often taken up by young people looking for flexible hours , people with caring responsibilities , and others who may not want to make long - term work commitments . my hon . friend the amendment is in line with our long - standing manifesto commitment to give zero - hours and agency workers the right to request fixed - hours contracts — a right that employers could not refuse unreasonably . the measure would maintain a flexibility that benefits both parties , whereas an obligation to offer guaranteed hours imposes a significant burden , which does not benefit either party . we are clear that employees should be supported to exercise this right — and all employment rights — without fear of any negative consequences in their workplace , and we are pleased that the government have taken steps to set up a unified fair work agency . we hope that the government will look into our other proposals — for example , the proposal to give zero - hours workers a 20 % higher minimum wage to compensate them for the uncertainty of fluctuating hours . the amendment strikes a balance between security for workers and flexibility for employers . much of the contention about the bill relates to the lack of detail and clarity around key definitions , which makes it hard for businesses and employers to plan . that is why i also wish to speak in favour of lords amendment 8 , which would define a short - notice cancellation as a cancellation with 48 hours ’ notice . that provides a workable balance . it gives employers clarity , while ensuring that workers are compensated when shifts are cancelled late . does the hon . member agree that fair notice may be relative to the industry we are talking about ? what is fair notice in , say , the retail sector may be completely different from what is fair notice for someone working on an offshore oil rig . no , i do not think so . forty - eight hours is a reasonable amount of notice in any sector . that is the kind of notice that enables , for example , parents to rearrange childcare , or other members of the family to rearrange their shifts . the 48 hours is a proper definition of reasonable notice , and 48 hours is 48 hours , whether you work on an oil rig or in a shop . i disagree that it is context - dependent . i am passionate about ensuring that single parents can enter the workforce , and a big barrier to that is childcare . when thinking about which amendments the hon . member will support , has she discussed the matter with any organisations representing single parents ? forty - eight hours does not seem like a lot of time . as someone with a long history of having to arrange childcare at short notice , i am well aware of the limitations that needing to arrange childcare presents , particularly for working women , both those who are single parents and those in a relationship . forty - eight hours is not ideal , but it is a reasonable compromise , and it is absolutely vital that employers have clarity about what “ reasonable notice ” looks like in this circumstance . i wish to speak in favour of lords amendment 48 . businesses , particularly those in the hospitality sector , that rely on seasonal workers are particularly vulnerable to changes in labour regulations and the knock - on impacts on the cost and availability of labour . the sustainability of farming businesses , for example , depends on being able to get the right people to the right place at the right time , and obstacles to that can have a big impact on ability to generate produce for sale , and therefore on the sustainability of the business . if we allow a different set of regulations to apply to seasonal work , a clear definition of “ seasonal work ” must be created to prevent employers from avoiding their legitimate responsibilities by claiming seasonal work in inappropriate circumstances . while we do not believe that this legislation should create contrasting employment law requirements for businesses , we continue to defend the principle that businesses should be properly considered when secondary legislation is created , so i urge members to support the amendment . lords amendment 46 , tabled by my good friend and richmond park predecessor baroness kramer , would introduce protections for whistleblowers . it follows her long - standing campaign for support for whistleblowers , and i pay tribute to her commitment to the cause . there is no standard requirement for most companies to have a whistleblowing policy . does my hon . friend agree that the bill would be a good opportunity to put in place real protections for whistleblowers who try to highlight crime , danger and malpractice in the workplace ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . the current framework for whistleblowing applies only if somebody has lost their job . it does not address the duty on businesses to follow up whistleblowers ’ serious concerns about crimes . that urgently needs to be addressed . too many whistleblowers who raised serious concerns about matters ranging from fraud to patient safety are ignored by their employers , or are reticent to speak out because of fears of unfair repercussions . the new clause in lords amendment 46 has received the support of numerous international civil society organisations , including protect and spotlight on corruption . it would be a long - overdue update to our once world - leading whistleblowing legislation , and i urge colleagues from across the house to support the change . i support lords amendment 47 , which would expand the right to be accompanied to employment hearings to include certified professional companions . currently , employees may be accompanied only by certified trade union representatives , leaving many workers to navigate proceedings alone . although trade unions provide valuable support to their members , only 22 % of workers are in a trade union , including only 12 % of private sector workers , with recent figures at a record low . the current provisions made sense at a time when trade union membership was higher nationally , but those provisions have become largely outdated as trade union membership has fallen and the labour market has modernised . without the amendment , we consign many employees facing unfair dismissal to navigating the requirements of disciplinary hearings on their own , without any kind of professional or educated support . does the hon . lady agree that the best protection against unfair dismissal is trade union membership ? no , i do not . i think that people should have the freedom not to join a trade union if that is what they wish , not least because their trade union contributions might go to a party that they do not vote for . many professions these days are better represented not by trade unions that cover a whole range of different employment categories but by professional bodies . as an accountant , i was a member of the association of chartered certified accountants . had i been facing a disciplinary in relation to my professional duties , i would have been much better represented by a fellow member of that body than by a trade union . i am a member of the chartered institute of personnel and development . professional bodies are there to set the standards of the profession . does the hon . lady not recognise the conflict of interest that could arise from the professional body representing an employee at a disciplinary hearing when it has to uphold the standards of the profession ? i understand the hon . lady ’s point , but a fellow qualified accountant would be better able to advise somebody facing a disciplinary than an official from a general trade union , who would not necessarily understand the points in dispute . the hon . lady makes good points in some parts of her speech , but not in others . the point of a trade union representative — or any representative who goes with an individual to a disciplinary process — is not to advise on the particulars of the worker ’s skillset , but to ensure that processes are followed and the worker ’s rights are protected . i fully understand what she says about accountancy , but are there people in her professional organisation who can give her employment rights advice ? disciplinaries relate to employees ’ rights , not their professional skillsets . as the hon . gentleman and the liberal democrats also support the retention of the opt - in system for contributions to trade union political funds . we believe in maximising choice and transparency for individuals in relation to the political funds to which they contribute . we therefore oppose measures that would make it an opt - out system . on trade unions , i also support the amendment on retaining the 50 % ballot threshold requirement for trade unions to undertake industrial action . the government ’s proposals in the bill would remove that threshold entirely , meaning that a trade union could vote in favour of taking strike action without that being voted for by a majority of eligible voters . strikes in the nhs have had a significant impact on addressing waiting lists and backlogs . we believe that there needs to be a threshold of at least 50 % ; there should be majority support from the workforce before that amount of disruption can be created . i refer to my declaration in the register of members ’ financial interests and my support of the trade unions . on the thresholds , does my hon . friend agree that those who choose to abstain should be counted as “ no ” votes ? i am slightly surprised to be referred to as “ hon . friend ” , not least because i am probably going to disagree with the hon . gentleman . to undertake such massive action , including in the nhs , and on the tube — we saw the level of disruption that that caused the public last week — there needs to be a positive vote in favour of strike action , which is why i back this amendment . you have n’t understood my point . i am happy to take another intervention . i simply mean that if there is a threshold of 50 % and it is not met , are those who did not participate in the ballot classed as “ no ” votes ? is that correct ? it is pretty simple . i think the point that the hon . gentleman is making is that people who did not express a view either way should be counted as voting against . what i am saying is that in order to justify the levels of disruption that strike action has caused recently , it is important that a trade union can demonstrate that it has majority support from its workforce . that is why i support the amendment . we believe that the current threshold for strike action is suitable , and that making it easier to strike risks putting further pressure on public services and damaging the economy , as we saw last week with the disruption across the capital caused by the tube strikes . most employers are responsible businesses that want to do the right thing by their staff , and many of them support the aims of the bill . however , they have significant concerns about the lack of clarity and the proposed implementation process . so much of the detail of the legislation is still undecided and will compound the challenges that small businesses are facing — from the government ’s changes to employers ’ national insurance and the reduction in business rates relief , to the absence of any meaningful action to bring down commercial energy prices . we must find a way to support and provide clarity for businesses that are trying to plan ahead . the liberal democrats support many aims of the bill and the spirit of measures that strengthen employment rights , but we will support the lords amendments that will help to ensure that the legislation strikes the right balance for workers and businesses . i welcome the government amendments , and thank those who have steered the legislation to this point . this is a generational upgrade in employment rights , and as a labour mp , i am very proud to support it . it is a landmark shift in some ways — a declaration that in modern britain , hard work should be rewarded with decent , stable work , security , dignity and fairness . having worked in the private and public sectors at different times in my life , i believe that the bill strikes a fair balance between the workplace rights of the individual and the rights of the employer . that is why i welcome the extensive consultation that the government have undertaken with the private sector and with trade unions and other organisations . i am a member of usdaw — the union of shop , distributive and allied workers — and the national education union and have proudly represented and spoken for them in my career to date . i wish to speak about a number of the opposition lords amendments and my concerns about them in short order . i have concerns about lords amendment 1 . zero - hours contracts have allowed people to be trapped by insecure work , low pay and one - sided flexibility . i know from speaking to shop workers in my constituency that they have not been able to plan ahead with their finances because of the unscrupulous nature of some working relationships with employers . that has left families unable to plan their weekly shopping and childcare as well as their futures , especially in respect of securing loans and other financial settlements . it has become a way for employers to manage down by allowing too many people to take very short hours and then not allowing them to gain other forms of employment . the government ’s measures to ensure zero - hours contracts are controlled — where the individual can request zero - hours contracts but there is an onus on the employer to support guaranteed hours — strike the correct balance . i therefore reject lords amendment 1 as the government ’s measures strike a fair balance between the employee requesting and the employer giving . lords amendments 23 , 106 and 120 relate to sensible changes on unfair dismissal . as has been mentioned , under the last government the unfair dismissal provision was set at 12 months and that was extended to two years under the current government . this does not take into account the fact that many who are subject to unfair dismissal might have been working for the employer for a significant period and also be subject to paternity leave , parental leave and other types of support . we should be supporting people with secure provision in work , and i believe that six months is a fair period in which most employers would be able to grade that assessment . i do not accept lords amendment 48 on seasonal work . it would add a loophole by which employers could exploit workers . the bill pays due regard to the realities of seasonal work , both at christmas and in farming and other types of practice , and i would welcome consultation on such provision continuing . on political funds , i urge colleagues to reject lords amendments 61 and 72 . we must return to a model that has worked for over 70 years where people choose to opt out of political funds , because securing employment rights is one of the endeavours of a trade union . the trade unions were set up to secure rights for employees , and seeking to achieve that is one of their political endeavours . i have concerns about lords amendment 62 . the conservatives complain about the 50 % threshold but they did not adopt that in their former leadership election , and perhaps it will not be the threshold in their leadership election to come in the next six months . if they adopted their recommended 50 % threshold of members , we might not see a replacement . if they can not use it for their own internal processes , that raises questions about why others should be made to do so . i also encourage the government to consider online balloting as a next necessary step . we do online balloting for many of our leadership processes and it is a sensible way forward , as well as other forms of engagement by post . as a former teacher , i do not support lords amendment 121 . negotiations should be conducted in a fair way and the bill covers that , preventing one - sided correspondence between teachers and their professional body . as a former special constable , while i accept lords amendment 21 in principle in supporting our special constables on the ground , that should not just be for a single group of people but should be considered for others , perhaps including carers and other support workers . i welcome the government ’s review of employees ’ right to take time off ; that is the most sensible approach . on balance , i am not surprised that the conservatives and others do not support the bill — i and others have written as usdaw mps . i believe that we should support a balanced approach between employees and employers . i welcome the work the government and former ministers have done to that end . the bill strikes a fair balance between those who work in the private and public sectors and the obligations employers are to offer , which is why i will be supporting the government tonight . i am grateful to have the opportunity to speak to two specific lords amendments proposed in turn by lord burns and lord sharpe in the other place . while addressing different clauses , both amendments essentially come down to the same principle : defending fairness , transparency and democratic legitimacy against narrow sectional interests . on lords amendment 61 , in 2016 , after long and at times fraught debate , parliament reached a carefully constructed settlement on the question of trade union political funds . that settlement was not only fair and balanced but , crucially , was broadly accepted by all sides . the compromise was a simple one : it resulted in new members contributing to a union ’s political fund only if that member gave their active , informed consent . in contrast , existing members were left untouched and , importantly , unions were required to remind all members annually of their right to change their decision . this is both a fair and a balanced settlement . it is not a carve - up ; it is a genuine compromise . it respected both the collective strength of unions and the personal liberty of individuals . yet what do we see now ? we see a government seeking to dismantle that settlement , and the result is a return to an era where consent was assumed and where individuals found themselves supporting causes they did not share simply because the rules made it cumbersome to say otherwise . that is not a positive reform ; it is regression . in every walk of life — whether a subscription service , an insurance policy , or a mobile phone contract — the public quite properly expect clarity in respect of the terms they are committing to . why should those standards of fairness be cast aside when it comes to political funds of unions closely bound to the governing party ? lords amendment 62 deals with the threshold for industrial action . strikes have consequences . we have seen that only in the last week , with transport links across london brought to a standstill , commutes drastically prolonged , and the consequential significant disruption to people ’s day - to - day lives . as a former doctor who , i should point out , did not go on strike in years gone by , i have seen at first hand the consequences of medics taking industrial action : operations cancelled ; out - patient appointments postponed ; and the provision of healthcare delayed . when the livelihoods and wellbeing of citizens up and down this country are so significantly impacted , it is neither unreasonable nor undesirable that such action rests upon a clear majority . the 50 % threshold is precisely that safeguard . it serves as a clear assurance that industrial action has broad legitimacy and is not just the preserve of a militant minority . yet this government seek to sweep away that protection by voting down this very sensible and considered improvement to the legislation . both these amendments remind us that democracy depends upon consent , transparency and legitimacy . those values have been the bedrock of britain for generations . it would be a poor bargain indeed if they were set aside to placate the financial and political interests of a narrow few . i rise to speak to new clause 22 , which will ban the use of non - disclosure agreements in cases of harassment and discrimination . i thank my right hon . friend without doubt , however , today ’s victory will belong to the brave victims and survivors who have repeatedly spoken up and risked legal challenge and financial ruin by speaking out and challenging wrongdoing when they have seen it in their workplace . first and foremost among them is zelda perkins , who is with us today in the under - gallery . she set in train the # metoo movement by bravely breaking her nda with notorious abuser harvey weinstein . her tireless campaigning since has changed the law in the us , canada , new zealand and ireland . today , when we vote on this legislation , the uk will begin to have the most comprehensive law on ndas anywhere in the world . i know that the whole house will stand with her today to thank her for her campaigning , and the countless people who have had their lives ruined by the misuse of ndas . this law will have a direct impact on millions of lives . victims will no longer be silenced , their abuse ignored or perpetrators protected . last time we debated the issue in the house , we spoke about the trade unions , charities and media organisations that routinely misuse ndas to cover up wrongdoing . simply no part of our economy or workforce is immune from this practice , which ruins lives — from the victim of rape i spoke to who was banned from speaking about her experience with medical professionals , to the disabled journalist who was bullied out of his organisation and is now unable to tell prospective employers about his experience . he is now unemployed and homeless . as enormous as the new protection will be to individuals who have been affected or who could be affected in the future , the far bigger prize on offer through the bill is the wholesale culture change that it will bring about . the widespread misuse of ndas has sustained an environment where abuse and discrimination have been covered up , where silence has been bought , and where perpetrators were protected while victims were pushed aside . it has perpetuated and protected toxic workplace cultures and has allowed systemic and institutional abuse to be ignored . where harassment and discrimination take place in the future , employers will have to address them head on . abusers will have to face up to their wrongdoing and victims will not be the ones forced out of their jobs . today ’s legislation could not be more important , so i thank the new ministerial team for their continued commitment to it and for their agreement to new clause 22 staying in the bill . as so much in the bill , however , implementation will be as important as the primary legislation on the statute book . i will therefore be grateful if the secretary of state , when he winds up , could confirm when the government will launch the consultation attached to the new clause ? exactly what will the government consult on ? what will be the exact date for commencement of this important provision ? i will finish by drawing the house ’s attention to a case that starkly proves the need for this legislation and that has not been public since march this year . members and those watching our proceedings may have read the book “ careless people ” by sarah wynn - williams , a shocking exposé of the workplace culture at meta , its practices in myanmar and china , and how it has targeted teenagers in emotional distress to push consumer products on them in their darkest hours . despite previous public statements that meta no longer uses ndas in cases of sexual harassment — which sarah has repeatedly alleged — she is being pushed to financial ruin through the arbitration system in the uk , as meta seeks to silence and punish her for speaking out . meta has served a gagging order on sarah and is attempting to fine her $ 50,000 for every breach of that order . she is on the verge of bankruptcy . i am sure that the whole house and the government will stand with sarah as we pass this legislation to ensure that whistleblowers and those with the moral courage to speak out are always protected . sadly , we are not here to relitigate this entire bill , which is so wide in scope and impact , and yet so skimpy in detail , having been cobbled together for a headline under labour ’s “ first 100 days ” banner . i refer the house to lords amendment 61 , which without doubt will be dashed aside as labour seeks to salvage something , anything , as a legacy for its deposed red queen , the former deputy prime minister , lords amendment 61 would reinstate the requirement for trade union members to opt in to contribute to the political fund . incredibly , labour members , who bristle at commercial subscriptions that rely on consumer inertia , will likely vote down this sensible and proportionate change . the reasons why demonstrate the wider issue with the bill . the left ’s hive mind aside , the bill is a love letter to the unions — a thank you for all the support . labour has been bought with union gold , with donations totalling almost £ 40 million since in reality , the bill has little to do with actual working - class people , and the labour party has no monopoly on them in their ranks . instead , the bill does rather more for what is sometimes called the “ boutique left”—the trade union apparatchiks and their ilk . the bill only makes sense if we see it through the skewed prism of every employer being a robber baron and every union organiser a saint . it does nothing for all those who will struggle to find a job in the first place , as its granting of day one rights will give companies — already facing big bills thanks to employer national insurance contribution rises — pause for thought . other amendments fight a rearguard action with a sensible six - month qualification period . the bill means that unions are going to party like it is 1979 — but they should have a care . in ’ 79 , restive unions triggered strike after strike , sounding the death knell for both their own unfettered power and for the labour government . lords amendment 62 addresses the threshold for strike action , meaning that 50 % of eligible members would have to vote for action . are the unions not better being sure of the complete backing of their members before lighting the picket - line braziers ? again , the unions should learn the lessons of the past . next year marks a century since the general strike . although often talked of in reverential tones by the left , the strike left the unions ’ proud red banners in the dirt and the miners it was meant to support back in the underground galleries with worse pay conditions . why ? because the strike alienated the public . last week , the chat from the man forced on to the clapham omnibus when london was crippled by transport strikes was less , “ up the workers ! ” than , “ right up the workers , ” with their £ 65,000 base salaries and demands for a still shorter working week . business can not afford the bill unamended , as it will take an estimated £ 5 billion out at a time of belt tightening . the public can not afford the bill unamended , as it will facilitate more frequent and more damaging strikes , and it will make jobs harder to come by . labour itself can not afford the bill unamended . labour members may think that , with scandal and crisis all around , they can not sink any lower in the popularity stakes . oh , they can , and the bill is the ticking timebomb that could take them to their nadir faster than they imagine . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests , and to my proud membership of the union of shop , distributive and allied workers and the gmb . i pay tribute to my hon . friend today , we finally arrive at the concluding stages of this historic bill ’s long journey through parliament . it is a moment that has been many years in the making . for well over a decade , working people have been calling for the protections that this landmark piece of legislation will introduce . it is our duty to deliver them , and to deliver them in full . last year , people voted for change . they are crying out for change , and this bill delivers real , meaningful and positive change . it is therefore immensely frustrating , although sadly not surprising , to see the old coalition band get back together in the other place , to have one final go at obstructing this bill through changes , like lords amendment 1 , which will be the focus of my remarks . one of the defining aims of the bill is to end exploitative short and zero - hours contracts . the right to a guaranteed - hours contract is at the heart of the new deal for working people because , as i said on report , the rise of one - sided flexibility has been one of the most damaging labour market developments of the past 14 years . such contracts leave workers — often the lowest paid — vulnerable to sudden changes in income , with weekly working hours varying unpredictably . it is an unstable , precarious life that many are forced into , and it is long past time that this exploitative practice was brought to an end . lords amendment 1 , a throwback team effort from the liberal democrats and the conservatives , seeks to replace the bill ’s right to a guaranteed - hours contract with a far weaker “ right to request ” . at just five words long , the amendment may seem minor , but it is anything but . as working people know from bitter experience , a right to request often means no right at all . unfortunately , it is clear from the comments made by lords amendment 1 creates a loophole , enabling unscrupulous employers to use pressure or coercion to deter employees from making requests . it also puts that crucial protection out of reach of those who simply are not aware of their rights in the first place . far from delivering a new right , it reopens the door to workplace conflict , insecurity and exploitation , something of which i am sure the liberal democrats would not be proud . it is completely at odds with the spirit and purpose of the provision , and it must be rejected . we must deliver greater security , stability and dignity to people in their working lives . the right to a guaranteed - hours contract , and the increased financial security that brings with it , is central to achieving that . it will be transformative for living standards , productivity and the economy . i urge colleagues from across the house not to undermine this essential provision and to reject lords amendment 1 . working people are counting on all of us to do the right thing by them . i am pleased to speak in favour of the government amendment in lieu of lords amendment 21 , which commits the government to reviewing whether to add special constables to the list of roles that entitle an employee to request unpaid time off work from their employer under the employment rights act 1996 . special constables are volunteers who give their time freely , at no cost to the taxpayer , to support our police forces and keep our communities safe . they hold the same powers as regular constables : the power to arrest , to search and to detain . they carry the same responsibilities , face the same dangers and accept the same risks . yet , unlike their regular colleagues , they are unpaid . the special constabulary is one of the most remarkable institutions of british policing , with its history stretching back almost two centuries . the special constables act 1831 allowed justices of the peace to conscript volunteers to help restore order during riots and unrest . the specials were called upon again during the first world war , when regular officers enlisted to fight . their success led to the special constables act 1923 , which ensured their permanent place in policing . from their inception , specials were designed to be a national contingency force : citizens stepping forward in times of crisis to strengthen the police service when needed most . that role is no less relevant today . the government recently published a resilience plan , addressing the higher level of threat we face from russia , global instability and multiple risks here at home . in such a context , specials are not a relic of the past , but a vital part of our security and civil defence framework , and a reserve force in all but name . specials are also the face of community policing . they are visible , local and rooted in the communities they serve . they build trust between the police and the public , bringing with them outside perspectives that keep the police service grounded and accountable . for all these reasons , specials are indispensable to the government ’s stated ambition of strengthening neighbourhood policing , but the special constabulary stands at a crossroads because numbers are falling at an alarming rate . a decade ago there were around 15,000 special constables across england and wales , but last year there were fewer than 5,900 . while some specials are transferring to the regular police , that does not explain the drop . unfortunately , the majority are leaving policing altogether . currently , a third depart within their first two years of service . this rate of attrition is clearly both inefficient and unsustainable in the long term . too many leave before they have the chance to contribute meaningfully , which wastes not only their potential but the time and resources invested in their training . the challenge before us is clear : unless action is taken , the special constabulary risks fading away . that would leave a gaping hole in community policing and in our national resilience . in that context , i brought forward my original amendment to the employment rights bill , specifically to extend section 50 of the employment rights act 1996 to special constables . section 50 already allows those in certain civic roles , such as magistrates , councillors and lay prison visitors , to request unpaid time off work to carry out their duties . these are all important positions , but i find it surprising that the law allows time off for a meeting about a park bench , yet denies that same right to those who patrol our streets and keep us safe . of course , some employers do the right thing , by being understanding and supportive of the specials they employ , but many are not . currently , the employer supported policing scheme encourages employers to support specials voluntarily , but that is not enough . it leaves too many without support and does nothing to guarantee parity with other roles already protected under section 50 . a survey conducted by the association of special constabulary officers last year showed that over 60 % of specials receive no support from their employers . at present , employers are under no obligation even to consider a request for time off . at a time when government policy champions neighbourhood and community policing , increasing the number of specials should be an obvious choice . passing this measure will not cost the taxpayer any money , and an employer who genuinely can not spare their employee time to undertake their voluntary duties will still be able to refuse . increasing the number of specials in this way has also secured the backing of many police and crime commissioners , as well as the national police chiefs ’ council lead for the special constabulary , assistant chief constable bill dutton . although my original amendment to add special constables to section 50 was rejected in this house , it was passed by the house of lords . i thank lord hogan - howe , the amendment ’s principal sponsor in the upper house , for his support . although i am naturally disappointed that the government do not wish to keep our amendment as part of the bill , i wish to thank the relevant ministers for engaging with lord hogan - howe and me so constructively over the past few weeks . i appreciate the positive overtures that the government have made on this issue . i understand that the review that this lords amendment legislates for has in fact already started , so i hope that when it is concluded we will hear a positive response from the minister . i know that many special constables across the country , including emma murphy in my constituency , will be watching and waiting for the results of this review . i trust the minister recognises that and will deliver them the result they deserve when she reports back to this house next year . i proudly refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests , which relates to support from trades unions . i welcome the secretary of state and the new employment rights minister , my hon . friend i welcome the return of the employment rights bill and the opportunity to address the urgent priorities of the people of this country , which are improving employment rights for better security at work and , ultimately , better pay from work . the cost of living crisis remains a burning issue , and giving people the tools at work to tackle in - work poverty is crucial . this bill starts the process of delivering much - needed dignity and security for working people . it will not have escaped the attention of colleagues that members of the party now purporting to speak for working people are nowhere to be seen in this debate . we know whose side the reform party is on , and it is not working people . these lords amendments demonstrate the problems before us . i urge the house to reject the opposition ’s amendments , which , if passed , would weaken the rights and protections that this bill seeks to deliver . on lords amendment 1 , which would water down the right to guaranteed hours , let us be clear : moving from a duty on employers to proactively offer secure contracts to a model in which workers must request them would completely undermine the purpose of the bill . vulnerable workers , often young people on their very first job , should not be left in the position of having to plead with their employer for basic security . we have heard from unite members such as izzy , a pub worker who felt unable to raise issues for fear that her hours would be cut , and caren , a restaurant worker who was left with 40 hours one week and barely any the next , with her mental health paying the price . this house can not endorse a model that forces workers into the role of oliver twist , asking , “ please , sir , may i have some more ? ” the duty must rest firmly with employers . lords amendments 7 and 8 would reduce access to short - notice cancellation payments . again , the effect is to let employers off the hook . a 48 - hour limit is wholly inadequate . imagine a parent who is told late on a friday night that their monday shift has been cancelled ; there is no compensation , but there is still childcare to pay for . the hon . gentleman says that a 48 - hour time period is unacceptable , yet the bill does not specify what time period would be acceptable . does he have an idea in mind of what that number would be ? how many businesses has he spoken to about that ? the amendment speaks to those sorts of figures . i am making the point that that sort of notice is simply not acceptable . people can not live structured lives and be able to plan for their futures under such a dreadful regime , and i reject it wholeheartedly . that is not reasonable notice ; it is a transfer of cost and stress on to the worker . usdaw ’s evidence shows that , in many sectors , workers already get four weeks ’ notice of shifts . the risk here is that by lowering the standard , we drag conditions down across the board . that is why the government have rightly committed to setting notice periods through consultation , not through arbitrary amendment . the challenge is that we are waiting years before we have any response to what the numbers might be . does the hon . member find that reasonable ? in the meantime , we have no protections whatsoever for these people who we are all trying to protect . we want to get through this consultation as quickly as possible and to get this bill on the statute book so that the position is clear , but i take the hon . gentleman ’s point . we need to move on these issues as a matter of urgency , and he is right to point that out . lords amendments 23 and 106 to 120 propose to reduce the qualifying period for unfair dismissal from two years to six months . we can not support that halfway measure . our manifesto is clear : labour will deliver day one rights . accepting these amendments risks entrenching insecurity and delaying meaningful reform . workers should not have to serve a probationary period of six months or two years before being protected from arbitrary dismissal . we will fully consult on probationary arrangements to get them right , but we will not compromise on our principle of security from day one . i must urge the rejection of lords amendment 62 , which seeks to retain the 50 % turnout threshold for industrial action ballots . the threshold was a deliberate barrier imposed by the trade union act 2016 . no other democratic process in this country faces such a hurdle — not parliamentary votes or local elections . this house was elected without such restrictions . trade unions must not be uniquely singled out . removing the threshold restores fairness , strengthens industrial relations and honours our commitment to repeal draconian conservative legislation . finally , lords amendment 121 would permit academies to deviate from pay and conditions agreed through the school support staff negotiating body , which risks entrenching inequality . it could mean teaching assistants in the same trust being on wildly different terms , creating a postcode lottery in education and exposing staff to equal pay disputes . instead of undermining sectoral bargaining , we should be expanding it , ensuring fair , consistent and collectively agreed standards across the board . let us be frank : after years of pay erosion , school support staff truly need a pay restoration deal that values the vital work they do . in every case , the lords amendments before us risk weakening rights , not strengthening them . our task is to make work pay , end one - sided flexibility and ensure fairness and dignity for every worker . if this legislation does not go far enough to meet union demands for sectoral bargaining and a single worker status , members of this house will rightly call for a second employment bill this autumn . we can not sustain this anathema of fragile , insecure work for so many millions of people in this country ; they need that security to plan their futures , and they need to have the protections that those in employment enjoy . in addition , were they to be brought into that architecture , the treasury would benefit to the tune of more than £ 10 billion per annum , opposite the uncollected tax and national insurance contributions . working people have waited long enough . it is time for us to deliver the stronger rights and protections that they truly deserve . i intend to speak mainly to the provisions dealing with guaranteed hours , but i begin with a word of thanks to the government for what they have announced about special constables . it is not quite as good as adopting the amendment , but i welcome the review . i also commend my hon . friend i want to mention heritage railways , and an issue that is very important for the watercress line in my constituency . we are talking about amending a piece of legislation from 1920 about the employment of women and children in industrial settings . it was never intended to cover volunteers working in the heritage railway sector . the people working in or running that sector believe that the legislation is getting in the way . ministers say that it is not , but clearly , the lawyers have looked at the matter and have come to the conclusion that it is . it is very helpful for the secretary of state to have said today , on the record and on the floor of the house , what he has done . clearly , though , we will need more guidance to get through this impasse . will he nod his assent to writing to me with further details of how we might clarify the situation , so that heritage railways have the comfort of knowing that it is all right to have young people working in volunteer positions ? we will work on it . i am very grateful to the secretary of state for suggesting that he will try . i turn to the provisions dealing with guaranteed hours and zero - hours contracts . i understand why it is attractive to the government and the labour party to seek to restrict the availability of contracts that do not have a guaranteed number of hours . from listening to labour colleagues , it seems almost as if “ exploitative zero - hours contracts ” is one word . it is as if those words must always go together . we all want to end exploitation — that is why , in 2015 , the then government passed legislation to stop employers imposing exclusivity . we said , “ if you are not going to guarantee your employee a minimum number of hours , it is not all right to say that they must not work for somebody else . ” but not all zero - hours contracts are necessarily exploitative . one of the biggest users of zero - hours contracts in our country is none other than the national health service , through its use of bank staff . i notice that the liberal democrats announced a new policy today , which would require extra pay for people on zero - hours contracts ; i do not know whether they have yet costed that policy . by the way , for many of the people working as bank staff in the nhs , that is not their primary job but a second job . this allows a hospital or other setting to respond to spikes in demand . for many people with a zero - hours contract job , it is their second job , not their primary source of income . zero - hours contract jobs are also very important to people coming back into work , as many people on zero - hours contracts are students . particularly in hospitality , there is a pattern of work whereby an employee lives in two places : at home , and at their term - time address . they can stay on the books of their employer at home — it might be a local pub — while they are away studying during term time . it could be the other way around : they could have a job in their university town , and stay on the books when they come home . they can dial up or dial down their hours ; for example , many students do not want to work a lot of hours , or any hours , during exam time . contrary to what we might expect , and contrary to the all - one - word conception of “ exploitative zero - hours contracts ” , some people actually prefer a zero - hours contract . and some people do not . and some people do not , as the hon . gentleman quite rightly says . when i was working at the department for work and pensions , the issue of zero - hours contracts became a totemic issue under the leadership of i think we understand why the labour government wish to legislate in this way . it is something for labour mps to bring home . when so much else in their manifesto is falling apart before our eyes , they can say , “ at least we ’ve killed off this modern scourge , this huge growth in zero - hours contracts . ” as i say , the number of those contracts is not nearly as big as most people think . if you think about it , we have always had zero - hours contracts in all sorts of forms , whether it be piecework , commission - only sales , agency catalogue work or casual labour . in fact , it is possible that today , there are fewer people on a zero - hours contract than ever before in the history of the labour market . many colleagues might reflect on their first job . mine was washing dishes in a restaurant . we did not have the phrase at that time , but it certainly would have been a zero - hours contract , apart from the fact that there was no contract at all . if the government wish to reform this area , as they may , i ask them to consider the situation in sectors with great seasonality , including hospitality , tourism and retail , and to please look again at the concept of a 12 - week reference period , which does not reflect the reality of seasonality . i know that this will be introduced through regulations , not the primary legislation , and i welcome what the secretary of state said ; i think he indicated that the government were open to looking at a more sensible length of time . the government could also do things differentially by sector ; there could be one period for employers in general , and another for sectors or sub - sectors that have particularly strong patterns of seasonality . i also ask the government to reconsider the requirement to not just offer guaranteed hours once , but keep on doing it . that is introducing unnecessary bureaucracy . if the government want to make changes in this area , i encourage them to at least ensure that once an employer has made the offer once , the right can become an opt - in right . the government think that these provisions are something for back - bench labour mps to take home , but i ask labour colleagues whether they really want to take them home . do they want to take home higher unemployment , and particularly youth unemployment ? do they want to take home fewer opportunities for people returning to the workplace after many years away ? do they want to take home fewer opportunities for ex - offenders — those furthest from the labour market ? do they want to take home — because this will come as well , as night follows day — a further trend away from permanent employment and towards fixed - term temporary employment ? do they want to take home a shift from waged or salaried work to more self - employment ? is that really what labour wants to deliver ? i start by saying a massive thank you to the new ministerial team and the new secretary of state , who i welcome to his role , for keeping in clauses 14 to 18 of the bill , as well as for their warm words at the dispatch box . it is a pleasure to follow i turn to my declaration of interests . it is a shame that the shadow secretary of state , the employment rights bill has been called lots of things by lots of critics , but to me , it is about ensuring that all people can work safely , with respect and dignity , and have security in their work . for the past 15 years , we have seen people at the sharp end . we have heard stories of businesses struggling , and nobody wants that , but we have not heard the stories of what the previous government subjected working people to . they called it a living wage , when actually it was a minimum wage , which ensured that people were stuck in in - work poverty . a woman is 34 % more likely to be stuck in a zero - hours contract than a man . if we are talking about black and asian minority people , that figure reaches 103 % . disabled workers are 49 % more likely to be stuck on such a contract . this bill is about protecting all workers , not just some . on the right to sick pay , no one chooses to be sick . there are 1.3 million people without the right to any sick pay whatever . that is the difference that this bill will make , and the difference that a labour government will make to working people ’s rights . as has been mentioned , where are the grifters who sit on the opposition benches ? they pretend that they care about the ordinary working man — not often mentioning women ; often they talk only about the working man — but where are they ? they probably have their hand out for some more of elon musk ’s bitcoin , shall we say . i will talk about clauses that touch on our work on the women and equalities committee . the parental leave review , although not specifically in this bill , will impact on so many workers . it is a pleasure to hear that being talked about under a labour government . we know that parental leave is also a problem for self - employed people . we have heard a lot about the impact of bogus self - employment and rogue bosses , but we have not heard enough about the protections for self - employed people . in the course of our committee ’s parental leave review , we heard that 31 % of self - employed people do not take a single day off after their child is born . that is a shocking statistic . it is damaging not just for our economy , but for individuals and families . i thank my right hon . friend lords amendments 14 to 18 concern an issue that has a special place in my heart , and the hearts of many people , both in this chamber and outside it . i am pleased that in spring the government accepted the principle of two weeks of bereavement leave for parents who lose a pregnancy before 24 weeks . there is no sliding scale on pain for bereavement and loss , particularly for expecting parents . as a result of this change , grieving parents will no longer need to push through their pain to carry on working . women who experience baby loss will not need to use sick leave , which implies that their body had something wrong with it . arguments against the measure were founded on , “ well , you can always just take sick leave , ” but a person who has lost a child blames themselves . it is natural instinct . your first reaction is , “ did i do something wrong ? could i have done something differently ? should i have not eaten that ? should i have not done this ? should i have not jumped ? should i not have gone to an exercise class ? ” you think of all the things that you could have done to prevent it . for someone to go to their employer and say , “ i need to take sick leave ” , as if there is something wrong with them , is fundamentally different from how society sees pregnancy loss and miscarriage now , and i am grateful for that . the lords amendments include those who experience miscarriage , ectopic pregnancy , molar pregnancy , ivf embryo transfer loss and terminations for medical reasons . it follows the recommendations from the women and equalities committee inquiry . this measure is groundbreaking . the uk will be one of only four countries in the entire world that recognises miscarriage as the bereavement that it is , and i congratulate the government on taking this measure forward , because it impacts so many people . it impacts the families who are grieving and it impacts so many pregnancies . miscarriage is part of the pregnancy journey . when i first started talking about this topic , it was awkward , i will be honest . it was awkward not just because of the personal pain and how close the topic is to me , but because we did not talk about miscarriage , bereavement and pregnancy loss . it was stigmatised and taboo . so many women in their 80s and in their 90s have said to me , “ i am so grateful that you can talk about this now , because for so long i held it as if it was a shame and a secret . ” none of my losses — none of my babies who did not make it — are anything to be ashamed about , and we should be able to give parents the right to grieve that loss . this groundbreaking bill will do that . i pay tribute to the businesses that already offer bereavement leave , including many small and medium - sized enterprises , for those who miscarry . it may be informal . the british beauty council said that it was supportive of this measure , because it gives a framework for employers to know what is the right thing to do when an employee comes in and says , “ i have lost my pregnancy . ” we had streams of evidence , including from dentsu and the co - op . it is incredible that business communities out there have led the way and legislation now follows . that goes for the largest public sector employer of women : the nhs . when i was on the public accounts committee and now as the chair of the women and equalities committee , i asked the nhs , “ what is the cost of this ? what is the impact on your staff and your budgets ? ” the nhs said it was negligible , because it is the right thing to do , and because staff would have left or taken time off sick anyway . it is the right thing to do for the economy , too , because all the businesses talked to us about how much they had got back from their employees when they came back to work in terms of loyalty , trust and retention rates . expectant fathers are also a huge part of this , and i am so proud that we have extended that right to them . they grieve , too . we heard the experiences of men who had lost an expected child . one man said he had not been able to take his wife to hospital when she miscarried , because work had not allowed him to leave . she nearly bled to death on the way to hospital . these things have horrific impacts on everybody — not just mentally and emotionally , but physically . he left that job and found somewhere that respects him , his rights and his family ’s pain . i thank all the charities that support bereaved parents — including the miscarriage association , for which i am proud to say i have just become an ambassador — for the fantastic work they do . i thank tommy ’s and sands . there are also some individuals i want to thank . we do not say thank you enough in this place , so i will take this opportunity to thank them . my particular thanks go to vicki robinson of the miscarriage association and the former employment rights minister , my hon . friend let me also thank some formidable campaigners , for this is not a sole campaign ; it has gone through generations . i thank myleene klass , mbe , one of those formidable campaigners , and i thank the other sheffield mp , my hon . friend the fantastic member for sheffield hallam ( olivia blake ) , who has fought so hard to ensure that improvements are made for those who suffer from recurrent miscarriage . i thank the new ministerial team for retaining the amendments , and i thank my family and friends who were so supportive , both in this place and outside , and all those who contributed to the inquiry that led to this change , including the women who shared their devastating stories and painful experiences . now they can see that change , because now they have a government who recognise and acknowledge the pain and the losses for what they are : bereavement . i thank let me begin by welcoming the news that the bus manufacturer alexander dennis will keep its sites in scotland open after the announcement by the first minister , john swinney , that the scottish government have committed £ 4 million to a furlough scheme while the company obtains new orders over the next six months . i am sure the whole house will welcome the action taken by the snp government in giving domestic manufacturing businesses the opportunity to succeed and protecting skilled manufacturing jobs . from the outset of this bill , we in the snp have been clear in our support for legislation that will strengthen the rights of workers , having long campaigned for many of its provisions . there are progressive attempts to guarantee working hours and protections against unfair dismissal , and the bill begins to reverse some of the most damaging and insulting anti - union legislation of the previous government . none the less , throughout its passage in the house of commons we have called on the government to be bolder and to use this opportunity to deliver transformational change for workers . we proposed amendments to be more robust on fire and rehire , to improve statutory sick pay and to strengthen protections for migrant workers in accessing their rights , all of which were sadly rejected by the government . disappointingly , none of those issues has returned to this house in the amendments agreed to by the house of lords . instead , we see a series of amendments that seek to weaken the bill and weaken the rights of employees by watering down provisions on protections against unfair dismissal , the right to guaranteed hours , and the capabilities of trade unions . let me be crystal clear : the snp will not accept proposals that seek to diminish workers ’ rights . one of the most important elements of the bill is the provision ensuring that workers have rights from day one , a significant change from the current two years . workers should not have to wait to be protected from unfair dismissal . unfair dismissal is unfair no matter what time limit is imposed , so there should be none . the lords amendments would still allow for employees to be dismissed without the right to claim unfair dismissal for the first six months of their employment . failing to reject this amendment today would fundamentally undermine the principles and objects of the bill . the provisions on sexual harassment are also significant , particularly those that void agreements preventing workers from making allegations of harassment or discrimination , and void provisions preventing workers from speaking out about their employer ’s response to the relevant harassment or discrimination . we have heard some eloquent speeches today about the very reasons why that can never continue . astonishingly , the lords are attempting to except parliamentary staff from the protection from non - disclosure agreements . i have not heard that mentioned today , but it is a disgusting attempt by the house of lords to protect itself from allegations of sexual harassment and to silence those who are victims of sexual harassment in parliament . what is it about that unelected chamber , which brazenly seeks to use its power to protect and entrench its own privileges time and time again ? this is just another ludicrous example of why the house of lords needs to be abolished : it is utterly shameless . it has long been recognised that insecure work is one of the biggest problems facing our society . i have been listening carefully to what has been said about zero - hours contracts , and i want to register a few facts . contrary to what was said earlier , in the past decade there has been an increase in the number of zero - hours contract workers — not a small increase , but a 65 % increase . more than a million workers are on zero - hours contracts , including over 100,000 in scotland , and many more are on very short - hours contracts . rather than providing flexibility , zero - hours contracts offer little or no control or ability to forward - plan . let me give an example . a recent report from the work foundation noted that when wetherspoons introduced an option for guaranteed hours — guess what?—99 % of its workers opted for guaranteed - hours contracts , with only 1 % choosing zero - hours contracts . the bill seeks to require employers to make an offer of guaranteed hours to a qualifying worker after the end of every reference period , but once again the lords have attempted to weaken that by taking the onus away from employers and putting it on employees , requiring them to request guaranteed hours . it is important for the government , as well as rejecting this amendment , to provide clarity on the duration of the reference period and to define what constitutes a “ low ” number of guaranteed hours . similarly , the government seek to reject lords amendment 8 , which defines “ short notice ” for the purpose of an employer cancelling a shift as 48 hours , with ministers in the lords suggesting that when the regulations are made , “ short notice ” will be defined as a period greater than 48 hours . that is fine , but , as i have pointed out a number of times today , it is cold comfort for those who are currently on zero - hours contracts , who will have to wait until 2027 at the earliest to find out what comes back from the government ’s consultation . one of the biggest problems with the bill is that so much of it will not be clarified until further down the line , through secondary legislation and regulations , which means that much of it is still uncertain , much of it will avoid scrutiny , and much of it will be easy for future governments to reverse . indeed , the opposition are on the record as having made that last point today . of course , voters in scotland know that devolution of employment law is a far better way to protect workers ’ rights in scotland from a future uk government who might remove those protections . fair work practices are already being delivered by the snp scottish government , such as supporting collective bargaining , achieving real living wage employer status , and closing the gender pay gap faster than other parts of the uk . workers in scotland should never again have to see their employment rights eroded by any tory - led government , and we in the snp will continue to campaign — as scottish labour was previously committed to doing — to ensure that employment law is devolved to scotland or , better still , that scotland gains independence from consecutive westminster governments who seek to erode scottish workers ’ rights . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests , and my proud membership of the gmb and community unions . in bassetlaw , where the average hourly rate is £ 14.16 per hour for women and £ 14.69 for men — over £ 5 per hour less than the national average and not much higher than the national living wage — levels of pay and working conditions are issues that really matter to my constituents . my constituents are not afraid of hard work , but they want to go out each day in the knowledge that they have rights under the law that will protect them from unfair dismissal and guarantee that they can bring home a good wage and put a meal on the table . the employment rights bill has now ping - ponged its way back to this place , and my constituents can not wait for the fairness and rights that it will bring . this is their chance to level the playing field . the bill is not a handout ; it is a foundation for fair treatment at work . it ensures that when people go to work they are treated with dignity and respect . it is about strengthening rights , about no more hire and refire , about no more exploitative zero - hours contracts , and about job security from day one . it gives workers the power to have guaranteed hours of work , and to receive compensation for cancelled shifts . it gives them the power to demand safer workplaces where no one has to choose between their pay cheque and their health . it gives them the power to stand up against unfair firing and discrimination . this is not just about the law ; it is about restoring a sense of justice in the workplace . the other house has attempted to water down those rights , and reform has opposed the bill all the way through parliament . while as local people often tell me , good business is based on strong partnership , whereby employers and the workforce strive to meet the daily challenges in the workplace and the ups and downs of the economy . this legislation will work to strengthen those alliances . the bill is aligned with this government ’s ambitious industrial strategy and commitment to rebuild our economy , and i am focused on getting new jobs , and skills and training , into bassetlaw . i am grateful for being able to contribute to this debate . it is a privilege to follow so many powerful speeches , and the speech delivered by my hon . friend i welcome the new secretary of state to his place , and thank him for the way in which he opened this debate . at the outset , i draw the house ’s attention to my background as an officer of the gmb union and my current unpaid role as chair of the gmb parliamentary group . in that capacity , i thank i wish to speak specifically against lords amendments 121 , 11 and 1 , and in support of the government amendments that seek to strike them out . before doing so , i want to say a few words about my hon . friend i believe that lords amendment 121 contains significant drafting weaknesses and would fundamentally alter the nature of the proposed and restored school support staff negotiating body . first , the amendment states that employers may introduce new terms and conditions of employment that “ meet or exceed any minimum standards set by the sssnb . ” in legal terms , however , the sssnb will not set or determine those standards ; it is a statutory forum for negotiation . the actual conditions of employment will be set through regulations drafted by the secretary of state and approved by parliament . secondly , the actual parameters of a future pay and grading structure will be negotiated by the relevant parties : the representatives of employers , and the representatives of employees . that was the spirit of the original 2008 act and the actual operation of the sssnb in its original incarnation . given my experience as a former trade union officer representing school support staff , i know the contractual issues that need to be addressed are so complicated that they can not be satisfactorily resolved on the floor of the house . that complexity is a result of 14 years of drift , dither and political disinterest in the 800,000 support staff workers in england who keep our schools going , and it is a damning indictment of the decision to cancel the original sssnb . finally , lords amendment 121 risks creating confusion at a local level . the amendment states that employers must not be restricted from introducing “ improved terms and conditions ” , but changes to contracts are not merely introduced ; they are consulted on and agreed , either individually or collectively , under existing statutes . the effect of the somewhat loose wording in the amendment may be to encourage local attempts to make unilateral variations to contracts and terms and conditions . members who support this amendment might say that only improvements could be made under it , but both “ improvement ” and “ detriment ” are subjective terms . they are in the eye of the beholder , and i believe that if the amendment were to be carried through , the actual effect may be to increase the number of court cases concerning school support staff . i urge the opposition not to push a point , and to reconsider their wider opposition to the school support staff negotiating body . school support staff undertake essential roles , and they deserve the same professional standards and professional respect that is afforded to teachers . that is what the restoration of the school support staff negotiating body will achieve . we have debated the official opposition ’s amendments many times at various stages , but i want to comment on some of the lords amendments that stand in the names of liberal democrat peers , either in whole or in part . when i entered this chamber at the start of the debate , i did not presume that those amendments necessarily enjoyed the support of the liberal democrat front benchers in the commons , but i am afraid that impression was dispelled by the contribution from the liberal democrat spokesperson , i am at a loss to understand how the radical change in approach has come about among the liberal democrats in this house between committee stage , report , third reading and the debate that we are holding today . in fact , listening to the hon . lady , i felt an uncomfortable sense of déjà vu : it was like watching the rose garden press conference all over again . after all , her front - bench colleagues — the hon . members for chippenham ( sarah gibson ) and for torbay ( steve darling)—were at all times appropriately critical in committee , but they were essentially supportive of the principle of enhancing workers ’ rights . lords amendment 11 , which was originally a conservative amendment in the commons but now stands in the name of a liberal democrat peer , was not supported by the liberal democrats in committee . lords amendment 1 , which stands in the names of both liberal democrat and conservative peers , seeks to amend clause 1 . however , the liberal democrats supported that clause in committee and only voiced concern , which was reasonable , that timely guidance to employers must be issued to accompany it ; indeed , they voted with labour members when it was put to a vote in committee . i fear that this amendment , too , could have serious unintended consequences . the clause that it seeks to amend puts a duty on employers to offer regular - hours contracts to “ workers”—that is the language used in the legislation as it stands at the moment — but the amendment seeks to convert that duty into a right to request by employees . “ employees ” is , of course , a more restrictive category than “ workers ” ; indeed , clause 148 of the bill as drafted makes it clear that for the purpose of the interpretation of this bill , “ workers ” and “ employees ” mean two different things . many of the people who are classed only as “ workers ” are precisely those who may benefit the most from these protections . some 5 million people who are nominally casual workers in sectors such as social care , construction , hospitality , security and retail could be excluded from these protections if the amendment , which stands in the names of conservative and liberal democrat peers , were to be carried . i hope it is not the intention of those on the conservative benches to exclude those 5 million people . at the start of this debate , i could not believe that that was the intention of the liberal democrats , but now i am not so sure . the women and equalities committee heard compelling evidence earlier this year about misogyny in the music industry . that is exactly one of the areas where people who are classed as “ workers ” need protection , so i thank my hon . friend for raising this issue . i thank my hon . friend for raising a very powerful and relevant point . she is absolutely right that those are the groups of workers who would enjoy greater protection as a result of this legislation being carried . i want to respond to a couple of points that have been made in this debate . it was a shame that it was a shame to hear during the debate the number of references to trade union political funds only in the context of party funding . of course , the great majority of trade union political funds are operated by trade unions that are not affiliated to any political party . furthermore , the political funds even of labour - affiliated unions in practice often support meaningful and consequential campaigns that are supported by members across the house . one example to which i would draw members ’ attention is the assaults on emergency workers ( offences ) act 2018 — sometimes called the protect the protectors legislation — which began as a result of trade union campaigning that was not party political in its nature , and that legislation has since been broadened . i pay tribute to usdaw ’s “ freedom from fear ” campaign and the work that has been done to extend the same protections to retail workers . these are exactly the sort of valuable campaigns that , sadly , members from both the official opposition and the liberal democrats are looking to restrict . finally on points raised , i had not intended at the start of the debate to talk about heritage railways . indeed , it must be said that during those long years in opposition , when we were looking closely as trade union officials at the potential future issues that would be covered by trade union legislation , i think it is fair to say that that issue never once came up , but perhaps we were guilty of tunnel vision . [ interruption . ] sorry , i will not do that again . throughout all the debates on this matter in the other place and here , it has been discussed purely in theoretical terms . the contention has been that the 1920 act has had a chilling effect on the of operation heritage railways across the country . i do not think , but i would be glad to be corrected , that any actual examples have been brought forward of either court cases being taken or legal advice being received from those organisations , but it certainly feels like an issue that the transport committee may wish to consider . i have tried to limit my comments only to the details of the lords amendments , but if i may , i will make two general comments . as my hon . friend the member for ellesmere port and bromborough said , the labour manifesto committed to “ implementing ‘ labour ’s plan to make work pay … ’ in full … and introducing basic rights from day one to parental leave , sick pay , and protection from unfair dismissal . ” yet in front of us are lords amendments that would either obviate many of those commitments or reduce their potency to homeopathic levels . as he also rightly said , there can be no question of nodding through amendments that contradict the clear mandate we first received a year ago , and which commands broad support among voters of all parties . it would be an omission not to congratulate the hon . members who have campaigned for specific changes to the bill and have secured some important changes . that includes finally , as has been said a number of times , today ’s proceedings are not the end for this bill , because ahead there is the long task of implementing this manifesto commitment . i look forward to , i hope , playing some part in scrutinising the many statutory instruments that will be brought forward , which i am sure will gainfully employ the time of many hon . members throughout the years to come . i draw the house ’s attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests — like most labour members , i am proud to be supported by trade unions . others have mentioned the absence of reform members from this debate , and of course we know why they are not here : they do not support the measures in the employment rights bill , but they do not have the guts to say that to their voters . i am here to speak on behalf of my constituents , particularly those who feel insecure at work . they are the people who do not have assets and safety nets , who are not mobile and confident , who live pay day to pay day , and who feel that they must take whatever pay and conditions they are offered because they are terrified of the alternative . it is 12 years since this party announced a commitment to end exploitative zero - hours contracts as a means of controlling workers and avoiding employment obligations . i am a former teaching assistant , and many teaching assistants were working under a form of zero - hours contracts . does my hon . friend agree that this bill , as well as bringing back the negotiating body for teaching assistants and support staff at school , will greatly help them by taking away the zero - hours contracts under which they previously suffered ? the bill absolutely will do so . i remember speaking to a young couple when i was canvassing 12 years ago . the young woman had just had a baby , but because she was on a zero - hours contract , she was unable to get the maternity rights to which she was otherwise entitled . her young partner , who likewise was on a zero - hours contract , talked about his pay and conditions at work , and after asking him why he did not challenge his employer , i understood that so many young people do not feel able to do so because they feel so insecure and sometimes just so grateful to be in a job . that is why i am speaking against lords amendment 1 . it is absolutely right that the onus be placed on the employer to ensure that people are given regular contracts , and that we are not asking people who are often the most vulnerable and insecure workers to go to their employer and start asserting and demanding their rights . i have met many constituents over the past year or so , and i have learnt about the sheer vulnerability that , sadly , many working people feel , such as a tenant who tells me that they are frightened of demanding rights from their landlord because they fear they will be evicted . of course , reform also voted against our reforms banning no - fault evictions . my hon . friend is making a very powerful speech . he quite rightly mentioned that the reform uk members are not in their place , and does he agree with me that this really is a travesty ? when we think about the social media posts that they put out and the grand speeches they give up and down this land , does he agree with me that it really is a travesty for them to claim to be on the side of working people when they have the audacity to vote in this house against a bill introduced by a labour government on the side of working people ? it will not surprise my hon . friend to hear that i completely agree with that assessment . they are clearly not on the side of my constituents or the people i am talking about , who just do not feel that they can assert their rights . too many feel completely powerless , so it is right that we put the onus where it is . i will vote against the attempts in the lords to water down that part of the bill . on accessing the rights in the bill , does my hon . friend agree that , for people going about their busy daily lives at work and possibly struggling to make ends meet , there is a fundamental difference between a right to a contract with guaranteed hours and a right to request one ? there is a difference . my hon . friend is an expert in this field , having come to us from usdaw , and i know that those who worked on the bill will have thought this through carefully . it certainly chimes with my experience . people should not need to have to request and assert their rights ; they should be given those rights . that is what this government are doing . i draw the house ’s attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests : i am a member of unison and the gmb , and during the election i received financial support from trade unions . one thing i found when i was a trade union official was that it was not necessarily people who were not confident in asserting their own rights . a number of workers simply did not know what their rights were . oddly enough , employers were not running around handing out little laminated cards saying , “ here are all the rights you can ask me for . ” if employers are not made to tell them their rights , how else are employees meant to find out ? i absolutely agree with my hon . friend . that is what the bill speaks to . there is a power gap between the ordinary working person who does not necessarily know their rights and is unable to assert them , and the sort of person who , for example , might buy a house in their girlfriend ’s name . i will progress . i also oppose the attempt , in lords amendment 106 , to water down the bill by requiring six months for protection from unfair dismissal . there is of course a difference between unfair dismissal and fair dismissal . no employer is prevented from using fair grounds to dismiss an employee . the previous government extended the time before you could even claim unfair dismissal to two years . that left far too many people vulnerable to being dismissed at a whim , or dismissed because they had demanded their rights at work . i had an experience of that myself . i have never talked about it before , because i signed a non - disclosure agreement . shortly after becoming the branch rep for the university and college union when i was a college lecturer , i pointed out that the college i was teaching at was not paying the minimum wage to some of its staff . the college then attempted to dismiss me for bringing it into disrepute . thankfully , i was able to take on one of the top employment lawyers in the area at the time — only because they had forced me to teach an hr course — and give myself a crash course in human rights law . i left that place with a payout . i remember the shame i felt at the time for signing the non - disclosure agreement . i wanted to fight for other people , but at the end of the day i was terrified that i was going to miss my next mortgage payment and i was thinking of my children . that is the position that far too many people find themselves in . so what we are doing on non - disclosure is right . i have to ask all members , as they vote on whether to water this down , whose side they are on . will they be on the side of those seeking to cover up sexual harassment , rather than on the side of the whistleblowers ? in my mind ’s eye , as i vote this evening , will be real people in my bishop auckland constituency . i want to tell the house about two or three of them . a few months ago , i received correspondence from a parish councillor who is also a local farmer and a member of the labour party . he told me of his concern that every day he saw two women sitting in the bus shelter in a cold hilltop village . he approached them to ask them what they were doing there , because they were there for several hours . it turned out that they were care workers . they were dropped off in the morning and did a visit . at another point in the day they would do another visit , and another visit later . but they were only paid for the specific time that they were in people ’s houses ; they were not paid for the entirety of the day . that is a workaround to avoid paying them the minimum wage . the bill makes provision for a fair pay agreement in adult social care to address such practices . by the way , he then opened the village hall for them and made sure they had a warm space to wait in each day between shifts . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i , too , was a unison rep , and i have taken contributions from unison and other unions towards my election expenses . the point my hon . friend makes is very real in cornwall too . migrant care workers were left on a bench in a village from the early morning shift to the late evening shift . that must be addressed , and it will be addressed under the bill . it will , absolutely . we should not have people working in those kinds of conditions and that sort of poverty in 2025 . my hon . friend speaks about care workers . does he agree that one issue so brutally exposed during the pandemic was the fact that many thousands of care workers were classed as workers , not employees ? as a consequence , they could not get full access to sick pay . one consequence of that was that the fatality rates among both residents and workers were much higher in the care homes that did not make that provision available . if the provisions in the bill were in place then , many thousands of lives could have been saved . my hon . friend raises an excellent point . another great provision in the bill is that right to sick pay , which is so important and would have been so important for many care workers during the pandemic . in my mind ’s eye are those women sitting at that bus stop in the cold . two other people i met who were also care workers — one lives in high etherley and the other in etherley dene — told me similar stories . they did not vote for me . they did not vote for anybody , because they did not believe that anybody could fix their problems . they just told me that their lives were tough . they had to pay for their own uniforms . they were not really getting the minimum wage for their work . they felt disrespected by everybody . they felt vulnerable and left behind . but i made them a promise that if i came to this place , i would speak up for them . i am doing that today and i am voting for them today . finally , the employment rights bill is not just good for workers ; it is also good for businesses . so many family businesses in bishop auckland , shildon , crook and barnard castle all tell me the same thing . they tell me how much they enjoy contributing to our local economy and how important it is to them that they are a responsible , decent employer . but they tell me how tough it is when there is a race to the bottom . they want employment rights strengthened . they do not want the watered - down version coming to us from the lords . they want the full - fat version of this bill , because they know it is good for their workers and good for their businesses . i would like to start by thanking all members who have contributed to the debate , but especially the new ministerial team and senior ministers across the government who recommitted to this legislation in public , and especially to the previous ministerial team who advanced the bill as it went through the commons . in my constituency , of the six key pledges on our leaflets , this was the one that got the younger generation interested and engaged . they were worried about where they would work , how they would work and how they would get ahead in life . the vast majority of young people across this country are aware that the path to a better life comes through the workplace . what do we see when we look at these lords amendments ? it is another week , another paltry attempt by the opposition parties in the lords to undermine my constituents ’ rights at work . a couple of weeks back , there was an opposition day motion that told my constituents that if they worked behind a bar , they should have fewer rights than if they worked behind a desk . these amendments are just another feeble attempt at watering down a popular and generationally crucial piece of legislation . i join many of the young manufacturing workers at alexander dennis , which has been a staple industry in falkirk , will benefit from the bill . the apprentices and young manufacturing workers whose rights will be uplifted from the baseline will benefit from today ’s announcement because bus manufacturing will continue to exist in the falkirk area , as it has done for a century . the announcement gives us at least six months to make the move permanent ; the work to make it permanent must start today , and i am glad to have written to several ministers about that . the amendments from the other place that i would like to discuss would fundamentally undermine the mission to make work pay , which this government were elected to deliver . our mission was to tip the scales in favour of workers and , more importantly , build a generation who are treated well at work from age 16 to retirement . when i consider my experience of working from 16 to 22 , predominantly on zero - hours contracts in insecure roles , i see that was not the case for my generation . we should not lecture our young people , but show them that if they put in the graft , they can reap the rewards of their labour . we need to pull the baseline up to the level maintained by the many good employers in constituencies across the country — in falkirk and beyond . lords amendments that seek to remove clause 23 are , to my mind , clear attempts to water down one of the signature pledges of the bill and of this government ’s mission to make work pay : a guarantee of day one rights . even if i do not agree with those amendments , i understand many in the other place who have talked about the potential disincentive for many small businesses to hire in a difficult economy and a cost of living crisis . however , the rights of employees , and especially of our young workforce , should not be traded off in every instance in order to maximise spreadsheet efficiency in the labour market . i wonder whether my hon . friend agrees that when conservative members oppose day one rights , they are not really worried about the day on which the rights start ; they are actually opposed to the rights . that is why many of them can not muster an argument that is about more than , as he says , spreadsheet efficiency . i agree , especially if we look at unfair dismissal . the issue is not the cause of the dismissal ; at its core , this is about denying people recourse . if a worker can not claim unfair dismissal because of the two - year threshold , their recourse is substantially weaker . the course of the conduct is not changed simply because a worker has been in a place of employment for 23 months , as opposed to two years . this issue is real and corrosive . i have had young people in my constituency office who have experienced this issue , especially in the run - up to consideration of this bill . there has been a course of conduct in the workplace that has resulted in them wanting to leave , or somebody wanting to force them out , and this issue makes it substantially easier for bad employers — not every employer , of course — to force an employee out . it does not change the nature of the conduct , or what we should be tackling , which is poor employment practices . i do understand the concern that has been raised , but a two - year threshold often leads to workers , early on in their careers , being taken out of the workplace without process or prior warning . their only right of recourse , as i have said , is taking the employer to court through a far weaker form of redress that is often time - consuming , exhausting , fruitless and restrictive , and so deters them from pursuing their rights . is the hon . gentleman aware that many small businesses are fearful of day one rights because they worry that they might take someone on , only for it to become apparent within a few days that they are not appropriate for their business , and they then fear an employment tribunal for procedurally unfair dismissal , and the costs involved . the result of granting day one rights is that small businesses will be less likely to employ more people , and far less likely to employ people at the margins of the labour market , such as someone recently out of prison or someone with mental health problems . the bill will increase unemployment . i have to disagree with the characterisation of the bill as increasing unemployment . we have heard the same about other measures . to tackle the hon . gentleman ’s point about somebody coming into a workforce and not being cut out for it , which i have seen happen in hospitality and retail industries , i believe that is addressed by the probation provisions in the bill . i fully agree with my hon . friend that the probation period is the core of the answer to the question from i agree on the misinformation being put out about hypothetical situations , which are often talked about when we discuss hospitality . i recognise the point being put forward for small businesses , but i also recognise that those businesses have the right to a probation period , and to other employment models , such as part time working . i have seen that happen quite frequently . does my hon . friend agree that the conservatives bequeathed us an economy in which more and more people were moving out of work and becoming long - term sick ? a lot of that sickness was driven by mental health disorders — in particular , anxiety , worry and stress , which are driven by an insecure labour market . does he also agree that the measures in the bill to make people safer and more protected at work will improve mental wellbeing and productivity , and be good for economic growth ? i fully agree that the economic benefit of security in the workplace is evident . i have worked in some of the most insecure industries in hospitality , and people trying to rush themselves back into work was a severe issue , especially just after the pandemic , because they did not have another source of income . if they had to isolate , there was financial support , luckily , which was just about enough to cover wages for a period , administered by local authorities . however , there were still a lot more people who tried to drive themselves back into the workplace . i remember coming back after a 10 - day isolation period after having covid , and i could tell that i was not prepared physically or mentally to re - enter the workplace . it did make me think that i wanted to call in sick . it is then substantially more difficult for someone to re - enter work , especially in high - intensity industries . we often forget how physically intensive hospitality and retail workplaces , where people are working on zero - hours contracts , can be . my hon . friend is making a very powerful case . i rise merely to support what he is saying . about a decade ago , the university of manchester published research that found that being in forms of insecure employment may be more damaging to health than being unemployed . that is substantially clear . i would add the concern that long - term sickness translates into long - term unemployment , which is often seen in the most insecure workplaces . we often think of people burning out in a very high - stress , high - income job , but it happens right through our labour market . in my experience , it has led to devastating consequences , but those are personal stories that i do not have the permission or time to go into . i appreciate that the hon . gentleman is trying to get through his speech , and i very much respect the position he has taken , but i have to fundamentally disagree . we opposition members have been accused of scaremongering and of misinformation , but what does the hon . gentleman say to the federation of small businesses , the british chamber of commerce and the confederation of british industry , all of which have said that because of the bill and the regulations it will impose , employers will be letting go of staff , and that there will be a damaging consequence to employment and jobs ? does he think that that is misinformation and scaremongering , or is that just expert voices urging caution about the bill ? to address the point about substantial issues facing businesses , i acknowledge that is the case at the moment . we are not talking about energy costs or business rates , but i have a local business improvement district on my high street and i am well aware that it is talking about the costs that are put on business . this bill is a fundamental rebalancing in favour of workers , and frankly that would have to happen , irrespective of economic conditions . we need it to get people to believe that work pays again , because sadly much of my generation have not had that perception of work for too long . they may have seen other avenues — easier , passive income that does not come from hard graft , and from learning skills that are needed at a fundamental level . the problem is that the entry point to work for many young people has been casualised and is insecure , and often it does not seem as though there are any prospects . i believe the bill will change that perception substantially . to go back to doorstep conversations , this was one of the pledges in our manifesto that got young people engaged and thinking about how politics could fundamentally change their life and their experience in the workplace . turning to lords amendment 1 , i want to members to put themselves in the mind of somebody experiencing a zero - hours contract for the first time . imagine a person who , after years of zero - hours contracts , reliance on casualised working and low pay , is in an industry that is still adapting to the bill ’s provisions . they ask for a contract that reflects their hours , rather than what they would be entitled to under the bill if we reject the amendment . how likely would they be to press the issue with their employer in this market ? how likely is it that somebody will bang their fist on the table and say , “ i want the contract that i can request , rather than the one i am entitled to ” ? people often want to make a career in the retail and hospitality fields , but how likely are they to do so if they can not get the hours they are entitled to , or foresee their income for the coming year ? they can get a contract that reflects the shift that they are putting in . the problem with the amendment is that it shifts the power dynamic ever so slightly back to the employer , when the legislation quite rightly tips the balance in favour of the worker — the working people who have endured the acute impacts of a pandemic . i lost my job and my ability to privately rent , and i had to move back home , aged 20 , in a cost of living crisis . my hon . friend talks about tipping things in favour of the employee . how important is that , when we have heard of employees who have been exploited through zero - hours contracts , and who can not say no , or pay their bills ? some people , especially young women , have been sexually abused at work when they try to adjust their contracts . these measures are a vital part of the legislation . i thank my hon . friend for her excellent intervention . that dynamic is apparent in the workplace , from the smallest perceived grievance all the way up to the very serious criminal allegations she refers to . it is a power dynamic that we need to address through the bill . zero - hours contracts put far too much power in the hands of the employer over the employee . to address the point about notice of cancellation , i have worked as agency staff , and have been told not to come in the night before a shift . it is demoralising , quite frankly . in the workplace , it alienates people from colleagues they have had a good laugh with the day before . they may have worked closely beside them and said , “ see you tomorrow ” . most good employers know that and do not cancel shifts the night before . sadly , short - term cancellation has increased , especially post pandemic . this is something i endured , having lost my job during the pandemic picking up takeaways . imagine young parents working payslip to payslip who have to arrange childcare on a friday night and are then sent a text at 3 am on a saturday by their boss that says , “ do n’t bother coming in on monday . ” are we seriously saying that that gives them enough time to arrange their life and that it is fine to arrange their life around the employer , or should we rightly acknowledge that it is insufficient to provide legitimate flexibility ? it is a cover for the rare but corrosive practices of bad employers . we must keep this purpose in mind during the consultation with ministers . that moral clarity should negate the need for a lengthy consultation . it is no surprise that the party that opposed the introduction of the minimum wage and the employment relations act 1999 would be opposed to this legislation . i have to say , parties purportedly of the left or centre - left will have to explain at the ballot box to the young voters they seem so eager to court why their rights matter less if they work behind a bar compared with those who work in the city or in law , or perhaps even as a member of parliament . we were elected to this place to deliver for working people . the employment rights bill in full will deliver this , and i will be proud to vote down the lords amendments tonight . with the leave of the house , i call the secretary of state . i thank you , madam deputy speaker , and your colleagues for conducting this debate so efficiently and effectively . i am grateful to members from across the house for the contributions they have made to the debate today and throughout the development of this legislation . it has been exhaustively debated — in committee and in both chambers — and now it has come back again to be exhaustively voted on this evening . the employment rights bill will benefit millions of people across the country , raising the floor for workers and strengthening protections in the modern workplace . it will help unlock higher productivity , drive innovation and create the right conditions for long - term , sustainable and secure economic growth . this has been a constructive debate , and i thank members from across the house for their varied and valuable views . i will now turn to individual contributions . many members spoke about their broad views on the bill without asking specific questions , but i would like to unpick as many as i can , because it was a good , high - quality debate . i start with the shadow secretary of state , the shadow secretary of state said that the bill was a bad day for democracy . he is not unknown for overstatement , but given that the bill was in the manifesto that won the trust of the public , i would say that today is a good day for democracy . it is a day when the government elected by the people deliver on a promise made to the people , when a bill that was introduced in the house of commons , debated here in committee , and debated extensively in house of lords , has come back . this is democracy at its very best . i hope he will reflect on that . there are a lot of issues with voting percentage thresholds , which the shadow secretary of state also raised . i point out that he was elected to this place on 28 % of the vote of the community that he represents . if we apply his logic , he is advocating one rule for him and another for every other worker in the country . to the labour party , that simply does not stand . i also point out that during the conservatives ’ period in government from 2010 onwards , employment tribunal delays increased by 60 % . we therefore take no lectures from those who criticise some of the costs that may or may not be incurred as a result of the bill , because they inflicted enormous measures and costs on businesses around the country . my hon . friend my hon . friend my right hon . friend my right hon . friend asked what the consultation will cover . we will consult on the regulations that expand the types of individuals and measures that apply beyond those who were within the definition of “ employee ” and “ worker ” , and on the conditions for excepted ndas . to give an example , where a victim requests one and workers are covered by an excepted nda , they can speak about the relevant harassment and discrimination to , for example , a lawyer or a medical professional . my right hon . friend also asked about the timings . unfortunately , i can not provide a timetable tonight , but i want to be clear that this is a personal priority for me . i reassure her that we will be moving as fast as possible to consult on the related secondary legislation and commence the measure . i will stay in touch with her so that she is fully informed along the way . i am grateful to hon . members across the house for their contributions today and for their hard work in getting the bill where it is . it is of paramount importance that we get the bill on to the statute book and start delivering for businesses and workers as soon as possible . my right hon . friend is rightly talking about the contributions made in the debate by hon . members of various parties . i am always reluctant to criticise individual members who may not attend a debate , because they often have good reasons , but there has now become a pattern : at no point in the bill ’s passage has any reform member spoken to justify their stance of scrapping thousands of laws , including employment laws . does my right hon . friend agree that there is a democratic deficit in not one reform member ever having spoken to defend their stance ? yes , indeed . when we talk about seasonal workers , we do not mean reform members . of course , members have lots of duties elsewhere , but it is not surprising to me that a party led by somebody who goes to another country and invites that country to punish this country would be absent from a debate all about giving rights to workers right across the country . reform wants to strip our workers of their rights , their dignity and , through its actions , the pay in their pockets . the absence of reform members today suggests nothing else . i urge hon . members on both sides of the house to consider carefully the amendments i have proposed in lieu of those made in the other place . one of my predecessors as president of the board of trade once argued that workers need protection because , without it , “ the good employer is undercut by the bad , and the bad employer is undercut by the worst”.—[official report , that predecessor was winston churchill . he knew that the best employers need protecting from unfair competition by companies who trade at the expense of rights at work . the bill protects workers from exploitation and protects businesses from unfair competition . that is why the bill is pro - worker and pro - business . government amendment ( a ) made to lords amendment 22 . government amendment ( b ) made to lords amendment 22 . lords amendment 22 , as amended , agreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 1.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 326 , noes 160 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 1 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 7.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 330 , noes 158 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 7 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 8.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 316 , noes 172 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 8 disagreed to . lords amendment 21 disagreed to . government amendments ( a ) and ( b ) made in lieu of lords amendment 21 . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 23.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 329 , noes 163 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 23 disagreed to . lords amendment 106 disagreed to . government amendment ( a ) made to the words so restored to the bill . lords amendments 107 to 120 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 46.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 314 , noes 178 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 46 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 47.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 327 , noes 164 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 47 disagreed to . more than five hours having elapsed since the commencement of proceedings on the lords amendments , the proceedings were interrupted ( programme order , this day ) . the deputy speaker put forthwith the questions necessary for the disposal of the business to be concluded at that time ( motion made and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 48—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 328 , noes 160 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 48 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 49.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 332 , noes 160 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 49 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 60.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 318 , noes 170 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 60 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 61.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 330 , noes 161 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 61 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 62.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 330 , noes 161 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 62 disagreed to . lords amendment 72 disagreed to . motion made , and question put , that this house disagrees with lords amendment 121.—(peter kyle . ) the house divided : ayes 316 , noes 161 . question accordingly agreed to . lords amendment 121 disagreed to . lords amendments 2 to 6 agreed to . lords amendments 9 to 20 agreed to . lords amendments 24 to 45 agreed to . lords amendments 50 to 59 agreed to . lords amendments 63 to 71 agreed to , with commons financial privileges waived in respect of lords amendment 66 . lords amendments 73 to 105 agreed to , with commons financial privileges waived in respect of lords amendments 88 , 90 , 91 and 101 . lords amendments 122 to 169 agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that peter kyle , gen kitchen , dr marie tidball , anneliese midgley , michael wheeler , andrew griffith and sarah olney be members of the committee ; that peter kyle be the chair of the committee ; that three be the quorum of the committee . that the committee do withdraw immediately.—(deirdre costigan . ) question agreed to . committee to withdraw immediately ; reasons to be reported and communicated to the lords . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft counter - terrorism and border security act 2019 and the terrorism act 2000 ( port examination codes of practice ) regulations 2025 , which were laid before this house on question agreed to . ordered , that joy morrissey be discharged from the modernisation committee and john lamont be added.—(deirdre costigan . ) ordered , that pippa heylings be discharged from the environmental audit committee and roz savage be added.—(jessica morden . ) ordered , that joy morrissey be discharged from the procedure committee and john lamont be added.—(jessica morden . ) 10.59 pm further to a similar online petition of just under 1,800 signatures , i present this petition . the petition states : the petition of residents of the united kingdom , declares that plymouth city council ’s proposed expansion into 13 parishes in the south hams is strongly opposed by local residents ; further declares that plymouth city council ’s proposal threatens the identity , autonomy and rural character of long - established parish communities ; further declares that devon ’s district councils have presented an alternative 1 - 4 - 5 model for local government reorganisation in devon which takes account of local residents ’ wishes ; and further notes that this plan would retain plymouth as a unitary authority within its current boundaries , create a second unitary authority comprising south hams , teignbridge , west devon and torbay , and a third authority covering east devon , mid devon , north devon , torridge and exeter . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to reject plymouth city council ’s proposed boundary expansion into the south hams and instead adopt the 1 - 4 - 5 model proposed by south hams district council , which respects existing boundaries and reflects the preferences and interests of local residents . and the petitioners remain , etc . [ p003113 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(deirdre costigan . ) council housing is the first , most important and only viable solution to the housing crisis and to creating a society that matches the hopes of both the labour movement and the wider public . not long ago , under the leadership of the current prime minister , labour front benchers now sitting in cabinet declared that housing is a fundamental human right , that labour would restore social housing as the second - largest tenure ahead of the private rented sector and that the mantra of ministers as they did so would be “ council housing , council housing , council housing ” . as voters continue to demand the change that the labour government were elected to deliver , now is the time to recapture the clarity and optimism of that vision . it bears repeating at the outset that solely expanding the market supply of housing is not a solution to providing the genuinely affordable homes that so many families across our country desperately need . according to the charity crisis , only 1.4 % of one to three - bedroom properties in my constituency are affordable to renters who need housing benefits , while the number of people on the social housing waiting list in wolverhampton has nearly tripled in three years and rents have surged by over 35 % in the last five years . does my hon . friend agree that the housing emergency demands urgent and sustained action , and does he therefore welcome , as i do , this government ’s commitment to delivering the biggest increase in social and affordable house building in a generation ? i fully agree with my hon . friend . the points he raises perfectly exemplify why the provision of council housing is so important . england has seen 724,000 more net additional dwellings than new households since 2015 , yet in the same period the number of households in england on local authority housing waiting lists rose by more than 74,000 . given that 1.3 million households are on council housing waiting lists , and given the previous labour commitments to tackling the social housing crisis that he presented , does the hon . member agree that it is extraordinary that the minister has repeatedly refused to set a target for social housing ? the government think that setting a target for building any type of housing will address the housing crisis , but they are failing to address the specific problem of building social housing . i fully agree that council housing is essential to meeting the housing crisis that we face , and i hope that we will hear ambitious remarks from the minister . the question is not simply how much housing is built , but the type of housing built and for whom . as has been referenced , more than 1.3 million households in england are trapped on waiting lists — a rise of 10 % in the past two years alone . the scale of our failure to provide homes for all our citizens is staggering and reveals in the starkest possible terms the absolute folly of relying on the private sector to meet the public ’s basic needs . i commend the hon . member for securing the debate . in my office , as i suspect in everybody else ’s , benefits are the first issue of importance and housing is the second . one possible solution — i want to be constructive , and i showed him this suggestion — is to focus on building smaller social housing units , enabling older couples to move out of family homes , which are larger and more difficult to heat . that would enable younger families to stay within their community and older people to have homes that are easier to heat . when it comes to solutions , it is also about that . i thank the hon . member for that intervention . as usual , he makes a good point , and i wholly agree . as our whole nation loses out on the stifled energy , talent and creativity of so many people held back by not having a secure home where they can put down roots and flourish , it is ever clearer that the magic of the invisible hand of the free market is little more than a fairy tale told by economists to justify a refusal to meet our obligations to the least well - off members of society . however , if we look to our past for inspiration , we see many parallels between the challenges confronting us now and those facing the great post - war labour government who took office 80 years ago . then , labour came into office determined to change the “ devil take the hindmost ” approach to housing policy in which , as aneurin bevan described : “ the higher income groups had their houses ; the lower income groups had not . speculative builders , supported enthusiastically , and even voraciously , by money - lending organisations , solved the problem of the higher income groups in the matter of housing”—[official report , while the rest were left behind . bevan ’s solution was to start at the other end and focus on meeting the needs of the working class . our current state of affairs is much the same . we need the same priorities to get to the root of the contemporary housing crisis , because while house prices in many parts of the country are eye - wateringly high for all , the reality is that higher - income earners — frustrated though some of their ambitions may be — can find a home , while too often those at the other end of the spectrum can not . simply flooding the market with speculative developments will not address the problem . the only way to get high - quality homes that those on waiting lists can actually afford is to directly plan and deliver housing for people on low incomes . that is why we must have council housing — not housing built to maximise profits for developers ’ shareholders — offering rents linked to local incomes , and hundreds of thousands of them . i will be quoting bevan extensively , given his achievements in delivering high - quality council housing in this country . i congratulate my hon . friend on securing this important debate . since the labour government established the social housing policy and built the houses that were needed , the number of council houses has reduced as the thatcher government decided to sell those houses off . i will not object to people buying their own homes , but the government of that time did not allow the money generated to be reinvested in social housing , so the social housing stock reduced over time and has not been replaced . does he agree that the only way to address the issue is to replace the housing that was lost ? i agree with my hon . friend and will come to right to buy later in my speech . as bevan described , “ the speculative builder , by his very nature , is not a plannable instrument . ”—[official report , they build what makes them most money , while we need our councils empowered to assess the needs of their communities and directly deliver for them , because that is in the public interest . my hon . friend extensively quotes aneurin bevan , a man with whom he shares the honour of being unfairly suspended from the parliamentary labour party . i am sure that , like aneurin bevan , he will return and go on to deliver greater things . does he agree that a mass council house building programme could help to drive down rents in the private sector , because it is the lack of council house provision that has allowed private rents to rocket , pricing people out ? my hon . friend is absolutely correct in his assessment of one of the many benefits of council housing . the provision of council housing is uniquely important for meeting the government ’s objectives , because of the risk in designing housing policy around a target delivered by a market over which we have limited control . once again , bevan was right when he said that committing to general housing targets would be “ crystal gazing ” and “ demagogic ” . he also stated : “ the fact is that if at this moment we attempted to say that , by a certain date , we will be building a certain number of houses , that statement would rest upon no firm basis of veracity”.—[official report , it is only with council housing supplied directly by public authorities that we can give real confidence to the electorate in our ability to deliver . the last time we were building 300,000 homes a year , nearly half the total was council housing , and if we want to secure an increase in construction to 1.5 million new homes over the course of this parliament , the lion ’s share of the balance must come through council housing . i am really grateful to my hon . friend for securing today ’s debate . bevan also said that only municipal authorities could build the housing for our communities , and it was in my constituency that council housing originated , thanks to that great committee with wedgwood benn and joseph rowntree . does my hon . friend agree that we need to restructure the housing revenue account debt so that local authorities can borrow more in order to build the new council housing that we need ? i thank my hon . friend for that intervention , and i fully agree . before i get to costs , i would like us for a moment to lift our eyes to the potential prizes to be won by a new generation of council housing across the country , because council housing is not just the most effective tool we have to cut waiting lists , it is not just the best policy for transforming the futures of the tens of thousands of children going to sleep every night in temporary accommodation , and it is not just the surest way to save billions of pounds from the housing benefits bill . as if each of those were not justification enough in their own right , council housing is also the best hope we have to create the new communities that foster the sort of life and society that the labour movement has always dreamed of and strived for . this does not seem to be debated too often in this place , but the built environment we go about our daily lives in matters profoundly . the provision of council housing is not just about progress towards social justice and the eradication of inequality ; it is also about building a world around ourselves that contributes every day to the experience of self - worth , happiness , peace , connection and leisure in all our lives . if we are to be judged by future generations , not just on how many houses we build but on what we build , a policy dominated by council housing , with local authorities in the driving seat able to plan and design developments matching the hopes and identity of each community , is essential to avoiding the condemnation of history . far too many of the estates thrown up in recent years by the private sector have been notable mainly for their identikit and bland miserablism . even leaving aside the appalling quality of new build housing on many speculative developments , the status quo approach that housing policy has sunk into has in effect created a new phenomenon of spiritual slums , where a near total lack of facilities or features capable of instilling any sense of interest or civic pride condemns the young to a sentence of boredom . when we are building estates with more land given to car parking than space for children to play , rising disaffection and antisocial behaviour should not be a surprise to anyone . the choice facing the labour government in the provision of council housing is therefore between socialism and delinquency . similarly , the record of private housing development when it comes to integrating nature into our lives , a basic need that we know more and more clearly is essential to our mental health , is shocking . research has found that environmental features promised in planning conditions are not being delivered almost half of the time . simple measures to help declining insect populations , birds , bats and other iconic species have all been regularly shirked by developers , and nearly half of the native hedges that were supposed to be laid do not exist . once again , public goods , even when legally committed to , routinely fail to materialise when we rely on private interests to meet our nation ’s housing needs . public - led housing — council housing — offers the opportunity for different priorities that at last deliver something better . just as 100 years ago the independent labour party trailblazer ada salter set about housing the working class of bermondsey while also improving their lives by planting thousands of trees and filling open spaces with flowers , so now we can have council housing that goes hand in hand with nature . what is more , while so - called affordable housing set at 80 % of market rates is often used to justify speculative developments , in reality it continues to price key workers out of many parts of the country . the promise of a new era of council housing , in which rents were linked to local incomes , would create a more democratic and less stratified society in which people of all incomes lived side by side . i would welcome the minister ’s reassurance that at least 60 % of the affordable homes programme will be homes for social rent or council housing . prioritising council - led delivery should also mean greater public accountability for maintenance and tenant support . that , sadly , is often lacking where housing associations have moved too far from their original purpose . if we want genuinely affordable homes for those currently priced out of the housing market , better place making , greener and more integrated communities , and all the things that our constituents are demanding , so that we can go from wishing for a better society to that being the lived reality across our nation , we must have housing funded by patient capital that can focus on wider benefits , rather than mere monetary calculations . across the country , the evidence could not be clearer : only public funding is capable of mobilising the necessary resources at the scale required through long - term investments to deliver the public goods so conspicuously absent in recent years . over six years , at a time of shortages , debt , constraints , and competing demands on public expenditure that were even greater than ours , the post - war labour government oversaw the construction of more than 800,000 council houses — some of the best ever built in this country . will the hon . member give way ? i had better make some progress . that is the yardstick the government should measure themselves against . i now come at last to how we might go about achieving this . the place to start , as we have already heard , is with plugging the gap . we must stop draining our stock of council houses , year on year . it is a fact of mesmerising absurdity that in the last year of the previous conservative government , there was a net loss of social housing in this country , as over 20,000 homes for social rent were lost to right to buy . i welcome the determination of labour ministers to reform the right to buy , and to ensure that more homes are built than lost , and i especially welcome the planned 35 - year exemption for newly built properties . i urge the government to bring forward the necessary legislation for those changes as swiftly as possible . next , we need further planning reform to empower our local authorities to drive forward a council housing renaissance up and down the land . we need new social housing targets , to make the delivery of council housing the urgent priority of every local planning authority . ministers must bring together local authorities and charities like crisis to create fairer rules for eligibility for social housing , so that homeless people are no longer unfairly excluded . we need to build on the welcome measures that ministers have already brought forward on hope value , by allowing local authorities to disregard it entirely for the purposes of purchasing land to meet housing targets . that would not only make the provision of council housing on a vastly increased scale viable by ending the payment of inflated sums of public money to wealthy landowners , slashing an estimated 38 % off the total development costs of a mass - scale building programme ; it would also allow local authorities to capture the full uplift in land values associated with the delivery of their local plans , and to fund projects that combine high - quality council housing with improved space for nature and expanded public infrastructure . we must also face up to the reality of serious constraints on construction capacity due to a workforce that is too small and an inadequate supply of key materials . if we are to have the hundreds of thousands of council houses that we need in order to swiftly tackle the housing crisis , the government should ensure that the new strategic planning authorities created through devolution have tools at their disposal to direct available resources where they are needed most , even if that means putting limits on construction for private profit . of course , many of our local authorities will need substantial support to rebuild the capacity necessary for a major council house building programme . as shelter has said , in trying to balance budgets after years of funding cuts , local authorities have been forced to shut down their building operations , transfer their council stock to housing associations or focus on building private homes for sale . we will only see the council housing that our country desperately needs if we reverse that trend . alongside making more low - interest loans available to councils through the public works loan board , the government should raise the money needed to invest in a new generation of local authority planners , ecologists , designers and architects through a windfall tax on the largest property developers , which have dominated the market and enjoyed super - normal profits for too long . on funding , the government have already committed to a transformative £ 39 billion over 10 years for the new affordable homes programme . i will not try the minister ’s patience by calling for additional money today , but front - loading this investment and driving it primarily towards council housing could see us well on our way . i recognise that , even with all that , matching the scale of council housing delivery overseen by attlee ’s government is a daunting task , but in the context of the upcoming budget and increasingly vociferous debates on the merits of a wealth tax , i will take this opportunity to briefly fly the flag for the comparatively straightforward proposal of a levy on multiple home ownership . with so many in our society unable to access suitable housing at all , requiring those who own multiple homes to contribute to the public coffers a small percentage of the value of their additional properties would be both fair and proportionate . that leaves a final , concluding point . the case for more council housing and what it could deliver for our society is overwhelming in its own right , but even if we were to reduce ourselves to desiccated calculating machines , concerned only with economic statistics , the irrefutable fact is that we can not afford not to invest in hundreds of thousands of new council houses over the coming years . a major council house building programme would deliver a huge counter - cyclical boost to economic activity in every region of the country . alongside the vast savings to be made on the cost of temporary accommodation provided by councils , there would be knock - on benefits from secure decent homes : they would reduce costs right across the public sector , from the nhs to our schools . in short , it would be fiscally reckless not to invest in a new generation of council housing . we all deserve a warm , safe and affordable home , where we can put down roots and have the safety and security to flourish and grow . it is our duty to make that a reality . hundreds of thousands of families can not afford for us to delay or go slow . now is the time for the government to live up to their heritage and provide a new era of council housing that transforms lives up and down the country . i congratulate the provision of council housing is of the utmost importance to this government . after decades of marginalisation , we are once again asserting the necessity and value of social and council housing , as a crucial national asset to be proud of , to invest in , to protect and to maintain . doing so is imperative , because successive government have , for decades , failed to build sufficient numbers of social and council homes in england , and that failure is at the heart of the acute and entrenched housing crisis we face today . as has been noted , as a result of diminished social and affordable housing supply , particularly in the wake of the coalition government ’s decision in 2010 to slash grant funding for affordable homes , over 1.3 million households now languish on local authority waiting lists , millions of low - income families have been forced into insecure , unaffordable and often substandard private rented housing , and , to our shame as a nation , over 169,000 children will go to sleep tonight in temporary accommodation . acutely conscious that it would not be quick or easy , we entered government determined to turn that situation around , and that is precisely what we have begun to do . in the brief time available to me , i will detail how the government are kick - starting a decade of social and affordable housing renewal , and set out the ways in which we have laid the groundwork for a reinvigoration of council house building . as the house will know , the government stood for election on a clear manifesto commitment to delivering the biggest increase in social and affordable house building in a generation . we did so to address the urgent need to provide homes for those for whom the market can not cater , but also because the provision of social and affordable housing supports wider housing delivery . we know , for example , that on sites where more than 40 % of homes are affordable , build - out rates are twice as fast . boosting the supply of social and affordable homes is therefore at the heart of our efforts to ramp up housing supply more generally , and to meet housing need and housing demand in full across the country . given that the minister feels that social housing is so important , can he explain why he will not set a target for it ? the hon . member will know that we have not set a target as things stand , for the reasons that we have debated on many occasions , but we keep the matter under review . the question was why . and we have debated that issue on many , many occasions . i have given the hon . member very detailed answers as to why , at this point in time , we have not set a target , but we will keep it under review . as i have said , boosting the supply of social and affordable homes is at the heart of our efforts to ramp up housing supply more generally , and because direct delivery by councils has been key to high rates of house building in the past , getting councils building again is an essential part of our strategy . on social and council housing , the government have put their money where their mouth is . as the hon . member for north east hertfordshire made clear , at the spending review we announced £ 39 billion for a successor to the affordable homes programme over 10 years from 2026 - 27 to 2035 - 36 . i can confirm that given the priority this government accord to social rented housing , at least 60 % of homes delivered through the programme will be for social rent . accurately forecasting long - term delivery is inherently challenging — that is one of the reasons we have not set a social affordable housing target to date — but we believe our grant - funded social and affordable homes programme could deliver around 300,000 social and affordable homes over its lifetime , with around 180,000 being for social rent . the programme will continue to support regeneration schemes that provide a net increase in homes . it will also permit a limited number of acquisitions . we know these two delivery avenues are important to councils , including those with older homes and those who are looking to rapidly grow their housing portfolios to deal with acute local pressures . we also recognise that certain types of much - needed social and affordable housing can cost more to deliver , including those built by councils . that is why the programme has been designed to be flexible in order to support the greater diversity of supply required , with councils encouraged not to self - censor when coming forward with bids . to improve financial capacity , to deliver new supply and support long - term planning , for the first time , we announced a 10 - year social housing rent policy at the spending review . in addition , we have recently completed a consultation on how to implement a social rent convergence mechanism , the outcome of which will be confirmed at the autumn budget . the inclusion of this mechanism will be beneficial to councils , with many authorities letting homes below formula rent . both these measures will support their capacity to borrow and invest in new and existing homes . beyond investment , we have developed a series of measures designed to enhance councils ’ confidence , capacity and capability to deliver , and i want to cover some of them as they directly address the subject of the debate . as the hon . gentleman is aware and has noted , one of the government ’s earliest acts was to introduce transformative changes to the right to buy . we want to retain a scheme that helps long - standing tenants to buy their own homes , but we could not ignore the detrimental impact the right to buy was having on existing stock and councils ’ confidence to deliver new social and affordable housing . so we took decisive action to deliver a fairer , more sustainable scheme that provides better value for money and creates the certainty for councils to once again build at scale . changes that have already come into effect include returning the maximum cash discounts to between £ 16,000 and £ 38,000 . we have also enabled councils to keep 100 % of their right to buy receipts for reinvestment in new and existing homes . but we will not stop there . following consultation , we will legislate for a more comprehensive set of reforms when parliamentary time allows . these reforms will include a 35 - year exemption from the scheme for newly built homes , and a first option for councils to repurchase homes acquired through right to buy if they are sold on . on top of this , from 2026 - 27 , we will act on a long - standing ask from councils by allowing them to combine right to buy receipts with grant funding from the social and affordable homes programme . in addition to revenue generated from sales through right to buy and capital subsidy , we know how important borrowing is to councils ’ delivery plans . since 2023 , a preferential borrowing rate has been available from the public works loan board for council house building . so far , this preferential rate has enabled councils to borrow £ 6 billion for investment in new and existing homes . i am conscious that this rate is due to expire at the end of this financial year , and recognise the calls from councils for long - term certainty . considering this , we will confirm our approach to this discounted rate at the autumn budget . many of the measures i have mentioned so far relate to councils ’ financial capacity , yet we know — the hon . gentleman again mentioned this — that the challenges they face are not solely financial , and that as rates of delivery have declined in recent decades , so too have the skills and capacity of their housing teams . in response , in partnership with homes england and the local government association , we have launched the council house building skills and capacity programme , backed by £ 12 million of funding this year . this programme aims to upskill councils ’ existing workforces , recruit and train new graduates to become qualified surveyors and construction project managers , and drive engagement with the social and affordable homes programme . to conclude , this government remain firmly committed to delivering the biggest increase in social and affordable house building in a generation . within that commitment , we have prioritised the delivery of social rented homes , and we are taking steps to enable councils — whether those already delivering or those with closed housing revenue accounts who want to deliver — to once again build at scale . we have achieved an incredible amount over the space of just 14 months , but there is much more to come . we will continue to engage with councils and pull every lever at our disposal to increase their confidence , capacity and capability to deliver the social homes that low - income families across the nation need to live , grow and build a better life for themselves . question put and agreed to . house adjourned .