the secretary of state was asked — what steps he is taking to ensure that people leaving prison are provided with support to help prevent reoffending . what steps he is taking to help reduce reoffending . what steps his department is taking to help reduce rates of reoffending by people released from prison . since 2010 , crime has fallen and so has reoffending , with the overall proven rate of reoffending down from over 31 % in 2011 - 12 to 25 % in 2021 - 22 . that means that fewer innocent members of the public are suffering from the misery of falling victim to crime . we have gone further , building up initiatives including a new prison education service , expanded access to incentivised substance - free living wings for drug recovery , and the groundbreaking guarantee of 12 weeks ’ post - release accommodation to secure that essential period of stability for offenders to turn their lives around . with the reoffending rate at over 25 % , rising to nearly 50 % for burglary , reoffending is costing the country £ 18 billion a year and the service is failing to keep us safe . if just a small fraction of that cost were invested in probation staff to address the problems caused by 50,000 days lost through sickness and 2,000 people leaving each year , it could be transformative . will the justice secretary back operation protect , the campaign spearheaded by the justice unions , and ensure that there is a comprehensive workforce plan to recruit , retain and return the staff needed to prevent reoffending ? the hon . lady is right . we want to drive the offending rate down , and it is good news that it is down from about 31 % in 2010 to 25 % now , but we do believe in investing in probation . that is why the baseline is up by £ 155 million , and it is why we have added 4,000 trainees since 2020 . since the reunification of probation services , the number has risen by 17 % . probation officers keep society safe , and we will back them all the way . i recently raised the issue of social media use in prison , allegedly by one of those responsible for the murder of jack woodley , the son of my constituent zoey mcgill . we have a local campaign against knife crime , and at the latest working group meeting we discussed deterrents . zoey would like to understand what consequences were suffered by this individual for the posts that he sent , but also why he should be wearing a designer t - shirt and apparently leading a cushy life . prison needs to be seen as a deterrent , but if inmates are having it easy with designer wear and no consequences , how is that a deterrent ? may i ask the secretary of state what is being done to address this , and to make prison the deterrent that it should be ? i know that the whole house will want to send its deepest sympathies to zoey mcgill following the shocking murder of her son in 2021 . it was a dreadful crime , of which 10 men were convicted and for which they received life sentences . the use of social media in prisons is not acceptable , and this content was removed from the social media platform . we have been investing £ 100 million in prison security and new technology , including x - ray scanners to tackle the smuggling of contraband mobile phones . those who are caught can face loss of privileges , more time in custody , and even a referral to the police and the crown prosecution service for consideration of further charges . last year i was grateful for the government ’s support for my private member ’s bill to limit friday releases for vulnerable prisoners . it is an important measure and is now an act , but it is only one of the measures that we should be taking to reduce reoffending and help people get back on their feet when they leave prison . the excellent charity switchback has suggested that , at the very minimum , people should be leaving prison with access to id and an internet - enabled mobile phone just to get their lives in order so that they can access universal credit and other services . what consideration has my right hon . and learned friend given to those suggestions ? i pay tribute to my hon . friend for his excellent work in successfully championing the limit on friday prison releases . the changes for which he called came into force last november and are exceptionally helpful , and he deserves great credit for that . he is also right to point to the brilliant work of switchback , which has supported our resettlement work . that work includes the roll - out of 12 weeks ’ guaranteed accommodation and the introduction of resettlement passports , which contain precisely the basic information to which my hon . friend referred , such as a prisoner ’s name , date of birth , national insurance number and release date . they help prisoners to access essential services such as housing and healthcare , and contribute to the driving down of reoffending , which , as was recognised by the wife of a remand prisoner at wormwood scrubs wrote to me recently to say that the prison is so cold that prisoners are shaking , that they have to choose between work , social time and showering , and that the food is lacking in basic nutrition . i can explore these matters with the prisons minister in a couple of weeks ’ time during our joint visit to the scrubs , but does the secretary of state agree that such conditions are not conducive to rehabilitation ? this is an important point . we do deprive people of liberty and sometimes we have to do so in the case of those on remand , but the conditions must be safe , decent and humane — austere , yes , but humane as well . i commend the hon . gentleman for going to see the scrubs with the prisons minister , my right hon . friend i call shadow minister ruth cadbury . we need to tackle the revolving door of reoffending in our justice system , yet the reoffending rate , as a proportion of those leaving prison , continues to rise . whatever the secretary of state may say , i have heard time and again that the lack of secure housing , adequate and appropriate healthcare , education , job training and job support means that prisoners are being left to fail after they are released . it is the victims of crime who suffer when ex - prisoners reoffend . can the secretary of state announce when the government expect the reoffending rate to go down ? it is important to note that reoffending is down compared with under the last labour government . the hon . lady shakes her head , but one can dispute opinions in this house , but not facts . the reoffending rate in 2010 was around 31 % ; it is 25 % now . that means fewer people falling victim to crime . the hon . lady refers to accommodation , and she is right to do so . what she did not advert to is this government ’s decision to provide 12 weeks ’ guaranteed accommodation , which did not happen under a labour government . when i went to luton and dunstable , i spoke to a probation officer who has done the job for 30 years , and do you know what he said ? it is the single most effective measure to drive down reoffending . who did that ? not the labour party , but us . what steps he is taking to increase sentences for dangerous offenders . measures in the sentencing bill will ensure that those who commit the worst crimes will receive the most severe punishment . the bill creates a duty for the court to impose a whole life order for murders currently subject to a whole life order starting point and for those that involve sexual or sadistic conduct , unless there are exceptional circumstances . the bill will also ensure that convicted rapists must serve 100 % of their custodial term in prison , followed by a licence period . i thank the minister for his answer and welcome those measures . the two worst cases i have had to deal with as an mp was where women were brutally murdered by a partner or ex - partner . what are the government going to do in response to the clare wade review to increase sentences for people who commit those awful , vile offences ? my hon . friend is quite right to raise the issue of domestic homicide . we are determined to act to protect the victims of domestic abuse and ensure that the appropriate punishments are in place for perpetrators . that is why , following clare wade kc ’s review , we are increasing sentences by introducing statutory aggravating factors for murders that are preceded by controlling or coercive behaviour , involve overkill , or are connected with the end of a relationship . does the minister agree that wider society ’s confidence in the judicial system is often determined by how dangerous offenders are treated ? does he agree that it is vital that we get the message out there , both to wider society and to potential offenders , that there is the ultimate price to pay , which is a long sentence in prison for criminal offences such as these ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . i agree with those sentiments entirely . with reference to his oral statement of 6 december 2023 on hillsborough : bishop james jones report , , column 341 , if he will bring forward legislative proposals to introduce a legal duty of candour on public bodies . in his excellent report , “ the patronising disposition of unaccountable power ” , bishop james jones called for the creation of the hillsborough charter for bereaved families , as well as for the imposition of a duty of candour on police officers . we agree wholeheartedly , which is why the government have signed the charter alongside the crown prosecution service , the national police chiefs ’ council and others , and imposed a duty of candour on the police . we are also legislating to create a strong , permanent and independent public advocate to speak up for victims and their families , and to rigorously hold signatories to the charter to account . we stand ready to discuss what further steps may be necessary . the parents of zane gbangbola are in the public gallery today . zane was just seven when he died , following floods 10 years ago this month . the fire brigade detected hydrogen cyanide multiple times . his parents , kye and nicole , have been fighting for the truth about their son ’s death ever since , and a duty of candour would have helped them to get it . in lieu of that , will the government establish an independent panel inquiry with full disclosure , so that all the evidence can be reviewed by experts , we can finally get the truth about what happened to an innocent seven - year - old boy , and justice can be done ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for raising this deeply upsetting case , and i know the whole house will be thinking of kye and nicole as they continue to mourn the loss of zane . the hon . gentleman raises a critically important case . may i suggest that he and i discuss it and see what further steps can properly be taken in this difficult case ? i call shadow minister kevin brennan . i welcome the meeting that the secretary of state has just offered . the problem with the government ’s response is that it ought to be centred on the experiences of families , not on the convenience of state bureaucracy , in order to ensure that they are never repeated . there is nothing in what we have seen so far from the government that goes as far as we and , more importantly , the families believe is necessary to require public authorities to act with candour and transparency . why is the secretary of state persisting with a piecemeal approach , instead of committing to a clear , compelling and comprehensive duty of candour , as proposed in the hillsborough law ? as i say , the recommendations of bishop james jones ’s report , which we have considered extremely carefully , contained the charter for bereaved families , and it is worth reflecting on what paragraph 3 of the report says . it requires the public body to “ approach forms of public scrutiny — including public inquiries and inquests — with candour , in an open , honest and transparent way , making full disclosure of relevant documents , material and facts . ” taken together with the powers that exist under the inquiries act 2005 , there is potentially criminal culpability , misconduct in a public office and perverting the course of justice , but of course we will keep this under review . we want to make sure that public bodies do what they should — that is , act transparently — and we will always consider what further steps can be taken . what steps he is taking to exonerate sub - postmasters who were prosecuted due to errors in the post office horizon system . what steps he is taking with cabinet colleagues to exonerate sub - postmasters who were convicted due to errors in the post office horizon system . what steps he is taking with cabinet colleagues to exonerate sub - postmasters who were convicted due to errors in the post office horizon system . in september 2020 , a public inquiry was set up into the failings associated with the post office horizon it system and it is expected to report back later this year . in addition , over £ 160 million has already been paid out in compensation across three schemes . however , in its december 2023 letter , the independent horizon compensation advisory board expressed concern that the pace of exonerations was too slow , not least because evidence had been lost and many were simply too traumatised to come forward . that is why the prime minister has decided to bring forward legislation to quash the relevant convictions , and the department for business and trade will be announcing details shortly . these wholly exceptional circumstances have led to this wholly exceptional course . while i welcome the government ’s commitment to quash the wrongful convictions of sub - postmasters caught up in the horizon scandal , i also recognise that this is a complex area of law that could even raise constitutional issues . given that some sub - postmasters have been suffering for an extremely long time , does my right hon . and learned friend agree that any legislation should deal with these issues swiftly and avoid any further delays ? i thank my hon . friend for the careful and thoughtful way in which he addresses this significant issue . the judiciary and courts have dealt swiftly with the cases before them , but the scale and circumstances of the prosecution failure mean that this demands an unprecedented response , and that is why the prime minister announced this major step forward in response to the horizon scandal . we are keen to ensure that the legislation achieves its goal of bringing prompt justice to all those who were wrongfully convicted , followed by rapid financial redress . it is not right that wholly innocent people could potentially go to their graves with the mark and stigma of a conviction hanging over them . every day we hear further revelations about the post office , and today ’s shocking — well , it should be shocking — bbc story states that the 2016 swift review noted that the post office had always known about the balancing transaction capability of horizon and that the government knew in 2016 that a deloitte investigation into all horizon transactions was under way and that this investigation was suddenly halted after sub - postmasters began legal action . will the secretary of state confirm whether the ministry of justice was aware of this , and does he believe that that apparent non - disclosure to the inquiry is a threat to judicial freedom and independence ? in 2020 — coming up to four years ago now — an independent inquiry was set up under mr justice wyn williams . that is expected to report later this year , and it will go into properly exhaustive details about who knew what and when . we are absolutely clear that there has been an egregious failure of prosecution conduct — frankly , one that brings shame on those involved — and it is absolutely right that that inquiry should get to the bottom of what took place and who knew what and when . the current chief executive of the post office said in evidence to the business and trade committee last month that , despite various audits and investigations , we still do not know the full scope of the money overclaimed through horizon , or where it went . even the auditors are unable to give a firm figure . postmasters such as my constituent roger have suffered incredible stress and worry as well as significant financial loss , but the prospect of getting to the truth on these figures still seems far off . will the secretary of state commit to working with the secretary of state for business and trade and set out a timetable for updating the house on how much the post office took and what it did with the money , so that constituents like mine can start to get the answers and the justice that they deserve ? my heart goes out to roger and people like him . i have constituents who are affected , as i am sure everyone in this house does . we are a fair - minded nation , which is why it strikes us to the core . the hon . lady asks me to liaise with the department for business and trade . of course the moj will do everything it properly can , but dbt is leading on this . it is also worth reflecting that £ 160 million has already been paid out across the three schemes , and there is a very important , swift and robust approach of paying £ 600,000 to those who have their convictions quashed . that is the right approach . it is exceptional , but these are exceptional circumstances . i call the chair of the justice committee . my right hon . and learned friend will know that , only last week , the court of appeal criminal division , presided over by the lady chief justice , quashed in bulk a number of horizon appeals , on the basis of a half - hour hearing . when the cases get to court , the courts can deal with them swiftly . does my right hon . and learned friend agree that in framing any legislation , because of the constitutional implications , it is important that we bear in mind that the failures are the failure of a prosecutor to do their duty , or perhaps the failure of the state to come to the aid of victims , but they are not the failure of the courts , which always acted entirely properly on the material put before them by the parties at the time ? it was a failure of the parties , not of the courts . as always , my hon . friend gets to the heart of it . this was a failure of the post office , which is an emanation of the state , and it is the duty of the state to put it right . the courts have approached this entirely properly . the post office failed to discharge the solemn obligations on any prosecutor to act fairly and to comply with their obligations under section 3 of the criminal procedure and investigations act 1996 to disclose material that might reasonably be considered capable of undermining the case of the prosecution , or of assisting the case of the defence . when i was prosecuting , the first rule was that we did not seek a conviction at all costs , which is an important principle that the post office failed to appreciate . i call the snp spokesperson . whistleblowers have come forward to provide information that fujitsu was given an additional contract by the post office in 2013 to re - platform transaction data that was previously held on an external storage system that was considered to be the gold standard . it was replaced by a system that made it virtually impossible to investigate financial transactions in a forensic audit . does the justice secretary share our concern that this decision effectively destroyed evidence , preventing exactly the sort of audit trail that would exonerate those sub - postmasters who were convicted ? the department for business and trade is better placed to answer those specific points , but i would say two things . first , as a matter of sacred principle , if material comes into a prosecutor ’s possession that might be considered capable of undermining the case of the prosecution , that material should be disclosed to the defence . that is one of the things that has been considered by sir wyn williams ’s inquiry . what did the post office know , when did it know it , and what did it do with the material before it ? across the house , we want to get to the bottom of those questions . what assessment he has made of the effectiveness of the rapid deployment community payback pilots . it is a pleasure to respond to my first question from the hon . gentleman since his election . as part of the government ’s antisocial behaviour action plan , community payback teams are working in partnership with 11 local authorities to rapidly clean up antisocial behaviour in the community . the pilots started in july 2023 , and we are in the process of analysing the outcomes . initial observations point to the pilots having been successful , with thousands of hours of reparative work being done by hundreds of people on probation within 48 hours of local authority notification , allowing the public to see justice done . these rapid - deployment community payback scheme pilots were supposed to pave the way for the accelerated roll - out of exactly the kind of swift , transparent restorative justice that victims of crime in my constituency are desperate to see . unfortunately , i understand that , of a planned 20,000 hours of work , only 2,000 hours have been delivered by the pilots . can the minister reveal whether that is the case ? if so , what can be learned from the clear barriers to success ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman , but the clue is in the word “ pilot . ” these pilots were carried out in 11 areas , over three months , in the run - up to christmas , and 175 people completed around 2,000 hours of unpaid work . we are analysing the outcome of those pilots and , based on what that analysis says , i look forward to exploring how we can roll this out more widely across the country . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of the length of time that prisoners spend in their cells on reoffending rates . what assessment he has made of the potential impact of the length of time that prisoners spend in their cells on reoffending rates . we know that activities such as education and training can help to give prisoners skills that they need to get a job on release , thus reducing the likelihood of reoffending . that is why we launched our new national regime model for prisoners last month . it sets out core expectations for regime delivery , so that prisons are getting the most out of the working day and aiding the rehabilitation of prisoners . of course , we are also seeing improved staffing numbers to facilitate those regimes . reoffending costs £ 18 billion a year , but there is not just the financial cost but the impact on society in general , as well as on the individual . some young prisoners are still getting only one hour out of their cells , so there is no time for rehabilitation — they can perhaps do a little exercise , but that is not the same . how confident is the minister that all young prisoners will get the re - education that he has outlined ? when does he think all young prisoners — if these people have to be in prison — will get proper rehabilitation and the support they need when they come out of prison to get a home , to have somewhere to stay and to go into further training ? will he please give me some reassurance that better times are coming , not just for young offenders but for society as a whole ? i am grateful to the hon . lady for that . as she knows , i have a huge amount of respect for her , and she raises a hugely important point . we have heard from the lord chancellor that reoffending rates have come down from 31 % to 25 % since 2010 . so we are making progress , but we want to drive them down further . she also rightly highlights the importance of purposeful activity leading to the opportunity on release for employment , accommodation and so on . that is central to the opportunity for prisoners to rehabilitate themselves . we have seen significant progress made in our youth estate . the hon . lady talked about young prisoners and rightly said that we need to go further , but we believe the national regime model that we launched in january will go a long way to doing that . the additional staff we have recruited into his majesty ’s prison and probation service are central to doing that , as they enable that regime to be put in place . however , she is absolutely right to highlight this issue . i welcome the minister ’s acknow - ledgement that more education in prisons means cutting the reoffending rate and that clear link to crime . i welcome the national regime model and will be interested to see how it plays out , because i have seen chronic staff shortages and sickness absence , in particular at prisons such as hmp wandsworth , which i have visited . those things mean that prisoners are entirely missing out on any education , training and working opportunities . when will i be able to go back to hmp wandsworth and see the increase in staff and retention that is needed there ? when will the government get a grip on the prison officer recruitment and retention crisis ? again , i have a lot of respect for the hon . lady , but i am afraid that what she is suggesting does not entirely reflect the facts . if we compare the figures for 2023 and 2022 for band 3 to 5 prison officers , we see that there are over 1,400 more now , which is an increase of 6.7 % . in hmpps , sick rates are down in the past year , when just over 12,500 people joined and 7,500 left — again , that reflects an increase . we are investing in our prison officers and increasing their number , and that is being reflected in retention . i pay tribute to them for the work they do ; we should be talking them up , not down . i am encouraged by my right hon . friend ’s comments about the number of additional prison officers recruited . i have seen many of them and the fantastic work they do , both at hmp aylesbury and across the prison estate . will he say a little more about how we can ensure that we retain them once they have been trained and they go on to the wings ? this is an incredibly important career — it is key to reducing reoffending — and prison officers deserve credit and the support of everybody in this house . i am grateful to my hon . friend for that . he is absolutely right about the importance of not just recruiting new prison officers , but retaining experienced ones in our prisons . that is why the pay deal done last year with hmpps staff was hugely important , in recognising the important work that prison officers do day in , day out . it is also reflected in the fact that the leaving rate for prison officers is down in 2023 from where it was in 2022 . however , there is more to do and we will continue to do it . i call the shadow justice secretary . prisoners are spending up to 23 hours a day locked up in their cells as a direct result of overcrowding and the prisons capacity crisis caused by this government . however , i hear congratulations are in order following an announcement last month , not on the government actually delivering any of the new prisons they have promised or on even getting spades in the ground , but on their submitting yet another planning application for the leicestershire prison that the secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities has already ruled on once . is not about time that the minister renamed the new prisons programme the no prisons programme ? for a moment i thought the shadow justice secretary was referring to her own party ’s record when in government—7,500 prison places in three titan prisons that failed to be built , whereas we are committed to building six new modern prisons . two have been built , one is being built at the moment and two have planning permission . while prisoners are serving their sentence , they are not being allowed to leave their cell , but ironically the government are also releasing some of them early . despite a multitude of letters , questions and even a point - blank request from the justice committee , the government are refusing to tell us how many prisoners are being released early and from where . the public and parliament have a right to know , so will the minister finally come clean on how the early release scheme has been used so far ? if not , can he tell the house what he has to hide ? as the shadow justice secretary will know , my right hon . and learned friend the lord chancellor has made clear that in line with other statistics , for example death in custody statistics , we will publish those figures on an annual basis . i am sure my right hon . friend will agree with me that the rehabilitation of offenders can be greatly assisted by activity and work outdoors , in particular on farms and at horticultural establishments . will the minister reassure me that he is committed to increasing the quantity of work available outdoors and let me know what has happened to the prison estates in recent years ? my hon . friend is right to highlight the importance of a range of purposeful activity for those in prison , from skilled industrial work in workshops to outside work . a good example mentioned recently on “ itv racing ” , of all things , was about getting farriers and those working in the equine world into prisons — the example was a prison in solihull — to teach prisoners about job opportunities in the equine world . there are a range of opportunities out there , and it is important that they are available to those in our custody . what progress his department has made on reducing the backlog of cases in the crown court . we remain committed to reducing the crown court outstanding case load and have introduced a range of measures to achieve the same . we funded over 100,000 sitting days last year and plan to deliver the same again this year . we have recruited over 1,000 judges over all jurisdictions and plan to do the same again this year . thanks to the intervention of the lord chancellor , we have secured £ 220 million for essential modernisation repair work over the next two years . as well as retaining nightingale courts , the investments will also see 58 new courtrooms . the fact is that the crown courts how have a backlog of over 65,000 cases . if that is not bad enough , experts say the courts ’ capacity to deal with processing cases will not keep pace with demand . does the minister agree that that leads to too many victims unfortunately giving up on our justice system ? no , i do not accept that that means we are giving up on the system . the government continue to invest in every single lever that we can pull to increase capacity in our criminal justice system . given the additional work that the judiciary is doing , the disposal rate in our crown courts is up and we are seeing record levels of disposals , so we will start to see the criminal justice system heal , because we are still recovering from covid and the criminal bar association strike . i call the shadow minister . rape and serious sexual assault cases have increased to 10.3 % of all crown court cases and , with nearly 10,000 of them , they make up one in seven of the backlog . the average wait time for a trial after charge has risen to 18 months . we also know from the criminal bar association that there has been a tenfold increase in adjourned cases due to the fall in the number of rape and serious sexual offence prosecution or defence barristers , with the crown prosecution service now employing king ’s counsel to fill the gap . add to that the many legal aid deserts due to the shortage of solicitors and we have a major staffing crisis across the criminal justice system . how is that going to be fixed ? first , the figure that the hon . gentleman quoted for the average time for a rasso case is simply not true . the government have continued to invest in ensuring that rasso cases are brought forward . listing is a matter for the judiciary , and they take great care to ensure that vulnerable victims are dealt with expeditiously . in addition , we continue to invest in the legal aid system . the lord chancellor recently increased the fees to ensure that there are people able to perform rasso cases and section 28 video recording . on top of that , we continue to engage with the criminal legal aid review to see how we can continue to invest in and incentivise criminal defence barristers in the right parts of the system . what steps his department is taking through the criminal justice system to support victims of crime . since 2010 , we have ramped up support for victims in three main ways . first , we have driven down reoffending from around 31 % to 25 % , so that fewer people suffer the misery of becoming a victim of crime in the first place . secondly , we have created new offences such as stalking , coercive and controlling behaviour , revenge pornography , upskirting and non - fatal strangulation , so that those who betray trust and shatter lives can be held to account . thirdly , we have quadrupled victim funding , enabling massive investment in resources such as independent domestic violence advisers , which are up from barely existing in 2010 to more than 900 today , and we will go further with the groundbreaking victims and prisoners bill as well . i thank my right hon . and learned friend for all the sterling work that he has just outlined , which is making such a huge difference to victims everywhere . i wish to talk about a case that was raised with me at an advice surgery . after seeing an advert on the tube , my constituent — a man of very good standing — invested in what turned out to be a fraudulent company to the tune of £ 93,000 . he was clearly a victim of crime and , mercifully , his bank reimbursed his life savings after some challenge . he did get financial restitution , but the whole experience had wider , devastating impacts . those behind the company were registered in serbia and , to the best of our knowledge , have never been brought to justice . as my constituent did not go through the full criminal justice system , may i ask how victims such as he can be supported in cases like this ? i thank my hon . friend for raising her constituent ’s case . fraud is a pernicious , cruel crime and it can have an appalling impact , as i know from my own experience of prosecuting for the serious fraud office . to support victims in recovering lost funds , the financial services and markets act 2023 gives the payment systems regulator further power to mandate reimbursement where needed , and i am glad that that took place in this case . but to bring wrongdoers to justice , prosecutors , including the cps , the financial conduct authority and the sfo , regularly co - operate with their international counterparts to make arrests and secure evidence overseas so that , in appropriate cases , defendants can be extradited to face trial in the uk . the other critical point is that the victims code has been expanded , so that people such as her constituent can get the support they need . i would invite him , perhaps through the hon . lady ’s good offices , to look at the support that is available online . is the secretary of state aware of a new crime that is spreading throughout the north of england , including in your constituency , mr speaker , and in mine ? a group is preying on people who have cavity wall insulation . those people get themselves into the legal process and find the expenses are so high that they have to sell their home . it is an epidemic . it is also rather like the post office scandal . this is an early warning of a major scandal . will the secretary of state agree to look into this matter as it is very important , especially in the north of england ? i thank the hon . gentleman for raising that matter on the floor of the house . he will understand — i know that he well appreciates this — that it is not for the secretary of state to be ordering investigations , but , plainly , the matters he raised are serious . i invite the police and prosecutors to take all appropriate steps to investigate it if that is what is required . if he will make an estimate of the cost to the public purse of judicial processes under joint enterprise relating to violent crimes in each year since 2014 . although the ministry of justice collates statistics nationally on the principal criminal offence for which a perpetrator is prosecuted , convicted or sentenced , including data on their ethnicity , it does not collate data on whether the crime that they committed was part of joint enterprise , so unfortunately i am unable to provide the information that the hon . lady requests . however , we are considering whether such data could be collected as part of the common platform programme , which aims to provide a single case management system that would enable the sharing of such evidence and case information across the criminal justice system . i welcome that response , but the minister will know that manchester metropolitan university has recently carried out some research into the cost of prosecuting under joint enterprise . some £ 250 million is spent processing joint enterprises cases , and an extra £ 1.2 billion is spent incarcerating the just over 1,000 people who are convicted . those are eye - watering amounts of money , so does the minister agree that we need to review the doctrine of joint enterprise to ensure that only those who are responsible for significant contribution to a crime are punished for it ? there is a cost to justice . people who are found guilty of crime based on the evidence presented to a court of law have been sentenced , and there is a cost to their incarceration . simply put , the cost of incarcerating people is not a reason to review the law . if he will make an assessment of the potential merits of devolving responsibility for justice to the welsh government . the government are clear that it is in the best interests of the people of wales for justice to remain a reserved matter . the current arrangement works well and allows wales to benefit from being part of a larger , world - renowned justice system . devolving justice to wales would mean losing those benefits and would be extremely expensive and complex , requiring the duplication of functions . following the publication last month of the final report by the independent commission on the constitutional future of wales , the first minister of wales confirmed unambiguously that it is the policy of the welsh government , and indeed of the welsh labour party , to support the devolution of the justice system . in pursuing the devolution of the probation service , he said : “ we will have to explore … governance … financial arrangements ” and the interface between welsh and english services . when will the minister meet the counsel general for wales to discuss the devolution of justice ? if the representatives for the welsh government wish to meet me , i am more than happy to explain why wales being part of the english and welsh legal system remains the preferred option for this government . why would wales want to leave the most successful legal services system in the world ? what steps his department is taking to protect the privacy rights of rape victims in criminal justice processes . what steps his department is taking to protect the privacy rights of rape victims in criminal justice processes . it is paramount that victims come forward without fear that their privacy will be violated . that is why we are taking steps , through the victims and prisoners bill , to create a statutory restriction that limits police requests to third - party material that is necessary and proportionate , and to inform victims of why such material is being requested . the government have also asked the law commission to undertake a review on the use of evidence in sexual offence prosecutions , and it is due to report later this year . my constituent had all her counselling records used against her in a harrowing trial that she said was worse than the crime itself . will the victims and prisoners bill be sufficiently amended so that medical and social services records are not used against victims in court , and family courts are not used to perpetuate such abuse against the victim , particularly with the use of the term “ parental alienation ” ? i am truly sorry to hear of what happened to the hon . lady ’s constituent . i hope that i can reassure her by saying that new regulations will be published under the victims and prisoners bill to create a code of practice setting out the principles that the police should apply to all third - party requests , including for counselling , therapy and medical notes . the police will be required to complete a new request form that sets out the purpose and impact of their request . the crown prosecution service also has a robust case file review process to ensure that guidance on necessary and proportionate requests is complied with . the cps pre - trial therapy guidelines make it crystal clear that victims must not delay therapy for criminal investigation and prosecution . recently , i was able to visit the gwent rape investigation unit and see what an excellent job the police officers there are doing . however , can the minister explain why the government thought it was appropriate to boast about the so - called progress on the rape review when the proportion of cases being charged has halved since 2016 , and the key adviser quit because of the lack of drive to improve outcomes for victims ? i have also heard very good reports of the work that gwent police are doing , so i am glad to hear what the hon . lady says . i must push back very slightly on what has happened since we launched the end - to - end rape review . we are prosecuting more rape cases than we were in 2010 . conviction rates are higher , and perpetrators are going to prison for almost 50 % longer than they were in 2010 ; the average sentence increased from six and a half years to nine and a half years . i accept that the last independent adviser to the rape review went , but last week we announced the appointment of professor katrin hohl , a legal academic who pioneered operation soteria , which i think every member of this house agrees has transformed the way in which police investigate and prosecute rape , and is leading to better criminal justice outcomes for victims . what discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the use of non - disclosure agreements in judicial processes . non - disclosure agreements can not prevent any disclosure that is required or protected by law ; nor can they preclude an individual from asserting statutory rights . the courts and judiciary apply the law in relation to ndas as appropriate in individual cases and , where necessary , determine whether or not they should be enforceable . last year , the legal services board stated that incidents of misconduct by lawyers dealing with non - disclosure agreements were a “ cause for concern ” , and that there was a strong case for a strengthened and harmonised regulatory approach . does the minister agree that there is a need for stronger regulation in this area , and will he support the bill tabled by my hon . friend i am more than happy to have a discussion with the hon . lady , but my understanding is that the solicitors regulation authority has already published a warning notice reminding solicitors and law firms that potential professional misconduct by a person or a firm should be reported to the regulator . if she believes that there are still gaps in that warning notice , or that more needs to be done , i am more than happy to have a meeting . if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . since the last justice questions , i have met with the families of those killed by valdo calocane : barnaby webber , grace o’malley - kumar and ian coates . they deserve answers , and a series of reviews are taking place , including by the attorney general , on referring the sentence in that case to the court of appeal . we have announced an early legal advice pilot to help families agree child arrangements quickly . i have visited leeds to see how £ 6 million is being spent to roll out state - of - the - art courtrooms as part of our £ 220 million investment in the court estate . i have travelled to the usa to meet my counterparts to discuss how russia can be held financially and legally to account , and i was fitted with a gps tag to experience for myself how effective modern technology is in holding offenders and justice secretaries to account — a constant physical reminder that debts to society must be repaid , court orders must be observed , and transgressors face the very real risk of the clang of a prison gate . [ hon . members : “ do you have it on now ? ” ] no , i do not . as my right hon . and learned friend just mentioned , he spent a day wearing a gps tag , along with jack elsom from the sun . could he outline what he learned from that experience , and say whether he thinks gps tags are a robust and effective means of monitoring and punishing low - level offenders ? will he reveal to the house who else from the lobby is on his list to be tagged ? i remind members that these are topical questions . i thank my hon . friend for his question . there is a serious point here : our modern gps tags act as a constant physical reminder that debts to society must be repaid and that breach of a court order will be detected , so that a person who steps over the line , literally or metaphorically , and enters an area from which he is barred knows that he is liable to be returned to court and sent to prison . we could put the entire lobby on alcohol tags , but i think that would deal a fatal blow to the uk drinks industry . i call the shadow minister . i recently visited cookham wood young offenders institution . there , officers told me about the challenges they face , including a staffing shortage and shocking recruitment issues , which have led to rising levels of violence . can the minister say when he last visited cookham wood , and why this government continue to be unable to solve those crucial problems ? i have visited cookham wood . i can not remember the precise date , but the really important statistic to note is that in the period up to the end of september last year , we recruited an additional 1,400 prison officers . the numbers are going up , and the attrition rate is going down . [ interruption . ] hold on . that is because we have introduced measures such as the new colleague mentor scheme , rolled out £ 100 million on security and so on . we recognise that the safety of our prisons is in large measure down to the quality and quantity of our staff , and we are improving on both counts . there was an interesting debate in the house of lords last night , in which lord hoffmann confirmed my understanding that the european court of human rights was wrong to impose a rule 39 injunction to stop flights to rwanda , and that we could safely ignore such an injunction . will the secretary of state confirm that that is his understanding of the law , and if we get the bill through parliament and have flights on the ground , will he ignore such an injunction ? and would that not be a good issue on which to fight the election ? order . sir edward , you should know better . this is topicals . you are a member of the panel of chairs as well ; you are meant to set an example , not abuse your position . i do not have the advantage of having listened to lord hoffmann , but we do not think that the strasbourg court will need to intervene , given that our domestic courts will have carefully assessed whether anyone we intend to remove to rwanda would suffer serious and irreversible harm . i call the snp spokesperson . unison , of which i am a proud member , has criticised government plans to reintroduce employment tribunal fees , on the grounds that the “ only people who would benefit from their reintroduction are unscrupulous bosses ” . the resolution foundation has found that the lowest - paid workers were least likely to bring a claim , so how can the justice secretary defend plans to reintroduce employment tribunal fees , which will disproportionately affect those on low wages and present an obstacle to justice for those who need it most ? the £ 55 claim issue fee is modest , and this is completely different from the previous fee scheme , so i simply do not accept the hon . gentleman ’s characterisation . i am quite happy to defend that small , reasonable fee as necessary to help defray the costs of our system . what percentage of the backlog in crown court cases is due to foreign national offenders , and what has been done to reduce that ? data on foreign national offenders is collected at the point when an individual becomes an offender — in other words , at the point of conviction — but in addition , the ministry of justice records the numbers in custody awaiting trial who are fnos , and that stands at approximately 3,300 . on driving the figures down , the home office is working to increase take - up of conditional cautions , which lead to fnos being expelled from the uk , in place of prosecution , in appropriate cases . the vagrancy act 1824 is 200 years old this year . yes , it was supposedly repealed in 2022 , but it remains in force . the criminal justice bill , unamended , represents a genuine danger to rough sleepers everywhere . when will conservative members stop this madness , and when will we see that 200 - year - old piece of legislation taken off the books ? i think the hon . lady for her question . the criminal justice bill deals with repeal provisions for the vagrancy act , and we are bringing the bill back on report with more on rough sleeping . i welcome the fact that 20 nightingale courtrooms have been set up around the country to boost capacity , but none of them appears to be in the east of england . i know we are all well behaved in the east , but have we been forgotten ? i can reassure my hon . friend that we would not dream of forgetting about him . we have seen an increase , particularly on special educational needs and disabilities , of over 300 % in receipts , and with the increased number of judges and panel members , we are seeing a 37 % increase in disposals this year . we are trying to address the issue of send with the department for education , and if my hon . friend thinks there is a problem in this area , i am more than happy to meet him to discuss it . i have heard the minister defend the reintroduction of employment tribunal fees , but the last time the government brought them in , there was a 70 % drop in applications . how many people will be denied access to justice this time ? the hon . gentleman is comparing apples with oranges . the two fees are completely different , in terms of quantum . a £ 55 claim issue fee is a small contribution towards the tribunals , which cost us £ 80 million a year to run . i do not think that that is unreasonable . this week , we celebrate the fifth anniversary of my civil partnerships , marriages and deaths ( registration etc ) act 2019 completing its parliamentary stages , but it is also the fifth anniversary of the government taking no action to enforce clause 4 , which gives coroners the power to investigate stillbirths . there has been some progress : on i appreciate that my hon . friend is increasingly agitated about the implementation of aspects of the bill ; however , the consultation was not conclusive , and the stillbirths landscape has changed . those issues have to be addressed if the bill is to be introduced correctly . according to a report produced by the national audit office last week , housing legal aid is out of reach for many people who are struggling to keep a roof over their head . countless people facing the threat of eviction and repossession have recently contacted me for help . with the cost of living crisis and rising interest rates , it is crucial that people can access legal help with their housing issues . what is the minister doing to ensure that housing legal aid is available to those who can not afford legal help ? we are investing an initial £ 10 million to make sure that legal aid is available for exactly those problems . under the homelessness reduction act 2017 , there is a solemn duty on prison governors to prepare ex - offenders for life outside prison . seven years on from the introduction of that duty , they are still not doing what they are required to do . we want reoffending ended , and if people are prepared properly for when they leave prison , we increase the chances of preventing reoffending . what action is my right hon . and learned friend taking on this ? my hon . friend has done spectacular work on this issue . his majesty ’s prison and probation service published a policy framework setting out the steps prisons and probation services must take to meet their duty to refer those at risk of homelessness . i was reading it this morning , and it contains template referral forms — and many other aids — that are to be filled out at prescribed points in the prisoner journey . governors are now held to account , as my hon . friend rightly indicates , for their record on preparing prisoners for life post release , which is why i am able to say that in 2022 - 23 , some 86 % of prisoners were accommodated on the first night of release . that is up from 80 % in 2019 . i know that question was on the order paper to be taken before topicals , but if the justice secretary could shorten his answers to make sure everyone has time in topicals , that would help me and others . last week , i visited idas — independent domestic abuse services — which is an outstanding organisation supporting survivors of domestic and sexual violence . they highlighted that parents ’ fear of having their children removed is preventing victims from presenting a case in full , and is preventing justice . how will the minister ensure that power imbalances in the family courts are addressed ? i am grateful for the hon . lady ’s question . she will know how much we are doing on victim support , particularly in terms of sexual and domestic abuse . i would like to speak to her about this issue , and about parental responsibility in the family courts , so i think we should have a meeting . i ask her to write to my office after questions to arrange it . last week , colin pitchfork , the double child rapist and murderer , successfully applied for a reconsideration of the parole board ’s decision not to release him , on the grounds that the decision was irrational . i have issued a survey across my south leicestershire constituency on parole board reform . will the secretary of state meet me urgently to discuss the parole board rules , as amended in 2019 ? i certainly will meet my hon . friend . he has been assiduous for many years in raising this matter on behalf of his constituents . the parole board does an exceptionally good job . there are two cases in which decisions appear to have been overturned because they were irrational , and that is why i am meeting the parole board tomorrow . the justice secretary mentioned the duty of candour that he imposed on the police . has he considered legislating to introduce the same for all public bodies ? i can say that we want to extend that duty to healthcare settings , because we do not want health professionals closing ranks when something goes wrong . it is important to say that since hillsborough there have been so many changes , including through the inquiries act 2005 , which mean that there can be criminal liability for those who do not do what the hon . gentleman and i must think is a matter of common sense , which is to tell the truth . wedding experts at hitched say that independent celebrants are the biggest trend for couples getting married this year , and with the church , registrars and humanists all providing additional options , it is about time that we updated the marriage laws , which are from 1836 . will the government publish a substantive response to the law commission ’s 2022 report on wedding reform ? as someone who benefited from the last wedding reform on equal marriage , i can say that this government are entirely committed to ensuring that we report as fast as possible on the law commission ’s review . if my hon . friend would like to meet my noble friend lord bellamy to discuss it further , we can make that happen . the backlog of asylum and immigration tribunal cases has soared from 35,400 to 41,500 in a month — a result , no doubt , of the home office pushing through decisions at the end of last year to clear its previous backlog . what is the minister doing to tackle this new backlog that they have created ? we are increasing fees for legal aid practitioners . we have seen a massive increase in cases going through the system , and that is why we are investing to make sure that legal representation is available . given that the existing prisons in buckinghamshire can not recruit to fill staffing vacancies , where does the ministry of justice think it will magic up staff and prison officers for the mega - prison that it now has planning permission for in my constituency ? my hon . friend is a champion of his constituents . while we may disagree on this issue , i know that he speaks for a lot of his constituents , and he does so vocally in this house . we have highlighted the increase of 1,400 in the number of prison officers . we are confident that we can staff all the new prisons and that they are necessary to meet our obligations . what can i do to change the secretary of state ’s view on joint enterprise ? has he read lord finkelstein ’s recent and very good article in the times ? please can the minister have an open mind and look at it again ? there are more than 1,000 young men in prison on long sentences . joint enterprise is there to ensure that those who act as the burglary lookout , those who provide the weapon in a murder and those who drive the getaway vehicle do not escape the consequences of their crimes , which shatter lives . it is already the case , as in the case of jogee , that the person must have helped or encouraged the commission of the offence and intended to do so . if the labour party ’s position is that such people should escape culpability , it should say so . our advice on this side of the house is clear : do not commit crime . ( urgent question ): to ask the secretary of state for the home department if he will make a statement on changes to uk immigration rules and the security of the uk ’s borders . the security of the uk border is a top priority for me , the home secretary and the home office . everything we do in this area is designed to reduce risks to this country and its citizens . border force performs checks on 100 % of scheduled passengers arriving in the uk and risk - based intelligence - led checks on general aviation . it is deeply disturbing that information that has no basis in fact was leaked by the independent chief inspector to a national newspaper before the home office had the chance to respond . we are urgently investigating this breach of confidential information in full in the normal way . moving to yesterday ’s changes to the immigration rules , since the launch of our ukraine schemes the uk has offered or extended sanctuary to more than 280,000 ukrainians , thanks to the immense generosity of the british public . i know that colleagues across the house are grateful for all the work that has been going on in communities to facilitate that support . almost two years on from the start of the conflict , the uk government ’s commitment to the ukrainian cause remains undimmed . it is right that we continue to adapt and develop our visa routes to ensure that they keep pace with the rapidly shifting situation in ukraine . we must ensure that they remain as efficient and sustainable as possible , while providing stability for those we have welcomed to the uk and those who still need our sanctuary . ukrainian nationals who may have previously been eligible to apply to come to the uk under the ukraine family scheme will remain eligible to apply for the homes for ukraine sponsorship scheme . separately , the government remain wholeheartedly committed to reducing levels of legal migration . measures to curb immigration abuse and further reduce net migration are being implemented , ranging from salary increases for work and family visas to reforming the shortage occupation list , removing the right for overseas care workers to bring dependants , and requiring care providers to be registered with the care quality commission before hiring overseas carers . the rule changes outlined yesterday , which relate to the care sector , pave the way for those measures to take effect . it has been reported today that hundreds of high - risk private flights have landed in the uk without proper border security checks having been done . if the minister disputes the figures , will he tell us the true ones now ? were all the high - risk private flights checked or not ? ministers have been warned repeatedly about border security risks on private flights . the prime minister may think it is just all his own mates , but there are risks from organised crime , money laundering , drugs and weapons smuggling , trafficking , and even terrorism . there has been a 75 % drop in class a drugs border seizures . there has been a 39 % drop in firearms seizures . criminal gangs are still organising dangerous boat crossings . there have also been repeated failures in security checks at western jet foil ; a 30 % drop in foreign national offender removals ; a 50 % drop in failed asylum seeker removals ; and new revelations of visa failures in the home office , which issued 275 visas to a care home that did not even exist . instead of getting a grip , what is the minister ’s response ? it is just to sack the border inspector and sit on his reports , as well as changing the rules to stop ukrainian family members from coming here . what message of solidarity does that send to a country we are supposed to be supporting in the face of russian aggression ? will the minister now publish all the outstanding inspector ’s reports ? is it true that no inspector will be in place for the next six months ? will he tell us the key border security facts ? have all high - risk private flights been met and checked in the last year ? home office ministers promised me in this chamber that that would happen 13 years ago . if not , will he tell us how many high - risk flights — maybe involving dangerous people and weapons — have been allowed into the country without proper border security checks ? the conservatives have broken the asylum system , bust the home office budget , badly undermined britain ’s border security and put our country ’s security at risk . will they ever get a grip ? i am very disappointed with the right hon . lady ’s response on the certainty provided by yesterday ’s announcement on ukraine . just before the february recess , we had a good debate involving colleagues from across the house where there were calls for certainty on the future of those visa schemes . the government have come forward and provided that assurance about where we go from here . of course , the first of those visas does not expire until 2025 . if we add on the 18 - month period , that is an additional two and a half years of certainty for individuals from the here and now , which i think is very welcome . there will continue to be an in - country and out - of - country approach . we of course engage with our ukrainian friends and allies and will support them in any way we can . we are ahead of the curve internationally in giving that assurance . the right hon . lady should be on the front foot in welcoming that , because it is good , positive news . we will publish the reports by the independent chief inspector of borders and immigration and our responses to them . that will happen soon . on the right hon . lady ’s questions about the flights at london city airport and the information put in the public domain , the home office categorically rejects the claims by david neal . mr neal ’s report on general aviation border checks at london city airport was submitted last week and underwent fact checking , as is standard practice . mr neal was made aware of a specific issue with the recording of data at london city airport that meant that a large proportion of flights recorded as high risk should have been reclassified as low risk . it is disappointing that he has chosen to put misleading data into the public domain . the home office ’s priority is to deliver a safe and secure border , and we will never compromise on that . when notified , we cleared 100 % of high - risk general aviation flights either remotely or in person , in accordance with the ga guidance , and we are committed to responding effectively , using an intelligence - led approach , as well as to working thoroughly with the wider law enforcement community . the right hon . lady will appreciate that there is a report on this issue . we will respond to the inspector ’s report , and that response will have answers to the substantive points posed in it . we will deal with it in entirely the proper way . it is rather ironic that the right hon . lady talked about the opposition ’s stance on the security of our border , because she quite happily voted against the nationality and borders act 2022 when we legislated to introduce electronic travel authorisations , which are critical to the future of our border security and allow greater automation for passengers . they improve the passenger experience at the border while being robust on border security . [ interruption . ] she is chuntering away , but she voted against those important measures . when it comes to dangerous foreign criminals on our streets , we hear those on the opposition benches opposing removal flights — the leader of the opposition and others have taken that stance . they would allow dangerous criminals and dangerous individuals to be on the streets of the united kingdom . this government have a credible plan to stop the small boat crossings of the channel and the risk that they present to our security , as well as the wider criminality . again , the right hon . lady has opposed all those steps . we have a plan and we are working through it . that is the position and it is clear for all to see . either i misheard , or the suggestion by the opposition that the measure the minister has introduced will prevent ukrainian family members from coming to britain is deeply untrue and highly irresponsible , is n’t it ? my right hon . friend summarises the situation neatly . there will continue to be an in - country opportunity for people to apply to extend their visas . through the homes for ukraine scheme , ukrainians will still be able to come to the uk to access the sanctuary that we proudly support . we have seen communities across the country doing an enormous amount of positive , welcome work to support that national effort . any suggestion that that will not be the case moving forward is wrong — it is deliberate scaremongering and people should stop it . i call the scottish national party spokesperson . there is a bitter irony in the uk government making changes to health and social care visas — a sector that is crying out for people — that will make it more difficult for people to come and look after our loved ones . they say , “ come and look after our loved ones , but you ca n’t bring your own . ” how utterly heartless . the sector is dominated by women , who are more likely to have children with them . what equality impact assessment has the minister carried out on these very poor plans ? what advice is he taking from the migration advisory committee ? this is a crisis of the government ’s making . the committee encouraged the government to pay people in the health and social care sector more and commended scotland , which has less reliance on people coming in because we have a workforce strategy and we pay care workers the real living wage . will he do the same ? to deal with the latter points first , that is not the case . there continues to be a route for ukrainians to come to the united kingdom . it is arguably a more effective route to facilitate sanctuary for people , with all the enhanced checks and support that come with the homes for ukraine route . there is the ability for people who are here in the uk to sustain and extend their sanctuary . the hon . lady should welcome that ; she was involved in the westminster hall debate before the recess , as was i. i am proud of the government ’s work to support communities to facilitate that sanctuary . we will continue to be front footed and forward leaning when it comes to doing so , because it is morally critical that we are at the forefront and are giving people that certainty , way ahead of our international allies . again , she should welcome that . when it comes to care workers , as i have said on many occasions , the current situation for dependants is disproportionate . we saw 120,000 dependants come with 100,000 care workers . that is not sustainable in the longer term . that is why we are taking forward these measures . the hon . lady mentioned specifically the migration advisory committee , which has consistently said that migration is not the answer to workforce shortages in the social care sector . that is why the government have invested £ 7.5 billion to support the strategy for social care workforce development and to boost capacity in social care , including through retention of the dedicated workforce already undertaking these vital roles . as a former minister for disabled people at the department for work and pensions , i can also say that i firmly back the work the government are doing to support more people domestically into work through the comprehensive back to work plan . the hon . lady should support those efforts . we are putting real resourcing behind that — that should be our first port of call . i welcome the news that the ukrainian visa scheme has been extended by 18 months ; that is very generous . could the minister confirm that while there is a war in ukraine and while it is unsafe for these families to return , they will have a home in this country ? i know that my hon . friend cares deeply about providing that sanctuary for our ukrainian friends , as do i , colleagues across government and , i would argue , members across this house . we are all incredibly moved by what we have seen in our communities , with people rallying behind those ukrainians to support them and to provide that warm welcome . we will continue to sustain that effort , which we do in partnership with the ukrainian government ; we regularly discuss these matters with them . of course , we will continue to sustain that sanctuary for the duration of this invasion . we are firmly on the side of the ukrainians in winning this war . i call the chair of the home affairs committee . accountability and oversight are critical to the effective management of uk border security . the home affairs committee has repeatedly questioned the government about the delay in the home office publishing the chief inspector ’s reports — i understand there are now 15 reports outstanding . we are also concerned as the chief inspector is the statutory body , and there is no deputy or provision for the institution to exist without the chief inspector in post . with david neal leaving at the end of march , will the minister update the house on what has happened to the recruitment process that ended in december ? when will the home affairs committee get the pre - appointment hearing that we are entitled to have for the new chief inspector ? i think the chairman of the committee will appreciate that it would not be appropriate for me to comment on appointment - related matters , but we will follow the proper process in appointing a chief inspector of borders and immigration . the shadow home secretary also asked about the laying before parliament of the government ’s responses to the reports ; as i said in response to that question , it will happen soon . people who want to work in our care sector from other countries are welcome to do so where it is appropriate . however , under the current model , many people are paying thousands of pounds to agents to contact care home owners in this country who , even if there are no vacancies , will allow people to come here and send them off to work in supermarkets or other areas . the pay then goes back to the agent — the individuals do not even get the pay . will the minister take measures to combat what is clearly a criminal conspiracy and prevent it from happening ? people who want to come and work here are being exploited ruthlessly . where we see abuse of our migration routes , we will root that out and deal with it robustly . that is one of the reasons the care quality commission accreditation angle has been such an important part of the package of measures we are taking forward , ensuring that the roles people come here to fulfil are credible , real jobs in these workplaces . we think it is right that there is a better audit trail for those appointments , not least for the very reason my hon . friend highlights — to minimise the risks of people being exploited , cheated and sold a fake prospectus for what they are signing up to . that can not be right . it is right that we as a government take a robust posture over it . tapadh leibh , mr speaker , and thank you for taking this urgent question . as you know , i tabled something similar after the bbc and the guardian reported that the family unification route for ukrainian families had been unexpectedly closed . i warned the government against such mean - mindedness . the uk government were the meanest - minded in europe at the outbreak of the ukrainian war , which caused a lot of work for civil servants , for the government themselves , and for mps — all unnecessarily . most importantly , it caused angst for families in na h - eileanan an iar and elsewhere , and concern and worry for those who want to come to the islands and elsewhere . why ? i would ask them to think again . can the minister confirm exactly what he has done ? i have a feeling he is being economical with clarity here . are the bbc and the guardian wrong in what they have reported ? the position , very clearly , is that we have arguably been the most generous with the approach we have adopted to provide sanctuary to our ukrainian friends . there will continue to be an out - of - country route through the homes for ukraine scheme to enable people to come here , as well as the visa extension . as i said , we are getting on the front foot earlier than others in providing certainty and in terms of the length of those visas . those are measures to be welcomed , not traduced . there is a certain irony about opposition members going on about border security , when a lot of them tried to prevent a load of convicted criminals from being deported . i welcome the income thresholds going up for getting visas and the changes for social care workers , too . i have been very concerned that other countries have produced evidence about how that route was abused and it is right that we clamp down on dependants coming here . on the welcome changes to net legal migration , will the minister provide the evidence and data soon to show the public that it is finally heading in the right direction and that they are being heard ? i am incredibly concerned that if mainstream parties , such as ourselves , do not get it and show the public that we get it on migration , it will fuel the extremes . my hon . friend speaks with real passion and i know that people in ipswich feel very strongly about this issue . that is why , as a government , we have a credible plan to bring the numbers down . we believe the inflows will be reduced by 300,000 , taking into account the changes we are delivering , relative to the year prior . on his request on what we can do to report around that and provide information about the progress we are making , that is something i am considering . so , when does the minister expect the next independent chief inspector of borders and immigration to take up the post ? we will follow the proper process to make an appointment . it is obviously right that we helped those in ukraine who urgently needed our help , but most people in stoke - on - trent and wider north staffordshire think that the net migration figures have been unacceptably high , and that that has put significant pressure on our local services . does my hon . friend the minister agree with me that it is right that those who come here and use services but have not contributed to their cost should face higher visa and nationality fees ? my hon . friend is right to touch on the general feeling in stoke - on - trent about the net migration situation . that is why we are taking action . the government feel that the borders and migration system costs we charge people to access those services should reflect the costs we incur . it should not fall to the uk taxpayer to pick up those costs ; it should be the individuals who avail themselves of those services who cover their costs . we continue to work towards that in greater detail . aviation has been consistently flagged as a danger to national security . does the minister agree that the failure to check those arriving in the uk that way is putting the united kingdom at risk ? i refer the hon . lady to what i said in relation to the shadow home secretary ’s earlier contribution and the questions she asked on that issue . we treat that subject with utmost seriousness . we will , of course , respond to the icibi report in a proper and thorough way , having considered the points it raises and ensuring that proper fact - checking is carried out for the reasons i have touched on . if the purpose of yesterday ’s announcement was to provide some reassurance to ukrainian citizens who have sought refuge in the uk , why are the government forcing them to go through yet another application ? every member of this house will have experienced the problems supporting the initial applications : there will be delays ; different family members will get confirmation at different times ; and children will be dropped off by mistake , causing great distress . my question to the minister is this . should ukvi not be focusing on its existing backlog , rather than adding unnecessary processes to its workload and distressing ukrainian families who are now our constituents and living in the united kingdom ? i disagree with the hon . and learned lady . we think this is an appropriate approach to extending the visas . it is right and proper that there is a proper process around that , and there are obviously reasons why visas are handled in this particular way . safeguarding concerns come into all these matters , including extensions , and that is why we will take the approach we take . i want it to be as light - touch as possible . i want it to be as easy as possible . all parliamentarians in this house should be providing reassurance today that the ukrainian people in our country accessing sanctuary will continue to be able to do so . i would argue that that is the responsibility of all of us as leaders in our country . a lot of people in this country , including my constituents , will be amazed that in the week of navalny ’s murder by putin and the tough times that the ukrainians are facing against russian reinforcements , the government have announced restrictions on ukrainian families coming here . i have campaigned for a long time , because so many wealthy russian plutocrats have been flying into this country on small private aircraft and helicopters for a long time . i have asked questions about that . perhaps we should ask boris johnson ’s friend in the other place , lord lebedev of hampton and siberia , what he knows about it . the fact is that we are providing the certainty that members across the house have been seeking for the future of the ukraine scheme . i do not think the hon . gentleman was in the debate we had prior to the february recess . i would argue that the house spoke with one voice , saying that we need to afford sanctuary for longer , recognising that the war remains ongoing but that the ukrainian people continue to have our firm backing in their fight against russian aggression . that is precisely what we have done through this announcement . i reject his characterisation of the situation . the message needs to go out that ukrainians who are here will continue to be able to have that sanctuary in the years ahead . families in all our constituencies , including east renfrewshire , rely on the skills and compassion of those who work in the care sector . the chief executive of scottish care , donald macaskill , yesterday described the government ’s plan to ban overseas care workers from bringing dependants as “ shameful and damaging ” , saying : “ treating international colleagues in this manner is contemptible . ” he is right , is n’t he ? there will continue to be an opportunity for international recruitment for care purposes , but we can not have a situation where 120,000 dependants come with 100,000 visa holders . that is not justifiable . that is not acceptable . that is why we are taking the approach we are taking . there will in future need to be a blend of approach to recruitment . i also happen to think it is right that we should strain every sinew to support people in this country to take on these roles with the proper skills , and that is precisely what the back to work plan does . closing the ukrainian families scheme almost two years to the day since putin ’s illegal war began is particularly cruel . the government speak of a rationalisation of the schemes , but what we really need are further measures to support family reunification . given the changes , what reassurance can the government give to those on these schemes that they will be able to bring family members to the uk ? we always keep under review the offer we have as part of the ukraine scheme and that will continue to be the case , but i reiterate the point that what we have done through this package of changes in its entirety is to sustain an out - of - country route to enable ukrainians to come to the uk to seek sanctuary , while giving certainty ahead of many other countries , including european union countries with which the hon . lady has an affinity . we have got ahead of the curve and provided certainty around sanctuary in a way that i think people in this country want to see . the changes the government keep making to the ukrainian scheme have unfortunately resulted in far too many ukrainians becoming homeless . when will the minister finally , as pledged by his predecessor , meet glasgow members of parliament to discuss how home office policies are making refugees homeless in the city of glasgow ? in fact , the announcement has provided real certainty about the future of the ukraine schemes at an early stage , and we are ahead of the curve internationally . the hon . gentleman knows me well , and we have always had a constructive working relationship . i am very willing to meet him to discuss the issue of asylum accommodation and support for refugees in glasgow , and i know that my colleagues in the department for levelling up , housing and communities who lead on the accommodation side of the ukraine scheme would also be happy to engage with him . i thank the minister for all his helpful answers . in the context of the open border , may i ask what steps have been taken to ensure that northern ireland does not become the back door to the rest of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland ? the hon . gentleman is right to raise that point . as he has recognised , we must ensure that our approach to border security is adopted properly throughout the united kingdom . i was pleased to be able to have a constructive meeting about the future of the ukraine schemes with the new deputy first minister of northern ireland last week , as part of the conversations that are taking place with the devolved governments . i told her that i would be very willing to meet her again , and i was delighted to see her in her place and taking on those responsibilities . i am sure that these are matters that she will want to discuss . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . you will be aware that the northern ireland assembly was restored two weeks ago . during the period when it was not sitting , members of the legislative assembly were not fulfilling the full range of their functions , and the secretary of state reduced their salaries . i wrote to the leader of the house last week about a matter of which you may well also be aware , madam deputy speaker : the matter of the abstentionist sinn féin mps who have not fulfilled the full range of their own functions , but have received millions of pounds in representative moneys over not two but 22 years . while they receive no salary from the house , the money that they do receive is allocated on the same basis as short money , namely to assist opposition parties with such processes as scrutiny and preparation for debates , in none of which sinn féin participates . i just wish to ascertain , madam deputy speaker , whether the leader of the house , having received my letter , has as yet indicated her intention of tabling a motion allowing us to discuss this matter . i thank the hon . gentleman for his point of order and for giving me notice of it . i have had no indication that the government intend to table a motion on this matter , and i believe that mr speaker has had no such indication either . however , the hon . gentleman will have an opportunity to ask the leader of the house a question on thursday when she has announced the forthcoming business . i hope that that is helpful ; i think that that is the direction in which he should go . further to that point of order , madam deputy speaker . this is not something that has happened in the last while ; as we have just heard from my hon . friend i do not think there is much that i can add to what i said earlier , but i am confident that those on the treasury bench and the whips have heard what both hon . gentlemen had to say , and i am sure that they will be reporting back . i urge the hon . gentlemen to take the matter up on thursday , when the leader of the house will be here . motion for leave to bring in a bill ( i beg to move , that leave be given to bring in a bill to expand the list of sporting events that must be made available for broadcast by free - to - air television channels to include all qualifying matches played by the scotland men ’s and women ’s national football teams in the world cup and the uefa european football championship ; and for connected purposes . like many people throughout the united kingdom , i look forward to watching the european football finals in june . not just scotland but england , and hopefully wales too , will be there if they win their qualifier . i was fortunate enough to attend the scotland games when the competition was held in england in 1996 , as well as going to france for the world cup in 1998 . scotland are my team . they represent our nation , and steve clarke and his lads have done us proud . we can dream of winning the competition , but in reality i shall be happy with our qualifying from the group . we have faltered and failed to do that before — sometimes through bad luck , although at other times it has been self - inflicted — but in andy robertson , john mcginn , scott mctominay and others we have a squad who are skilled and determined as well as a canny manager . the tartan army who are going to germany will enjoy the spectacle , while others , including me , will simply watch the games on television . that , after all , is how most people watch their national team . going to the game is either too difficult or too expensive , or else there is simply insufficient capacity for all to attend , so it is at home , on their tv screens , that most people follow their team . for quite some time , however , that has not been the case for scotland fans in the qualifying matches for this tournament or the qualifying matches for international competitions , which is why this bill is necessary . like the world cup finals , the euro finals are available on free - to - view channels — that is specified by law — but scotland qualifying matches are not protected . they have been available only through viaplay , a swedish media company , and at a cost of £ 180 per annum . in these tough financial times , that is a cost that many can not afford , no matter how much they would like to watch the games . it is a poll tax on scots watching their national team . the qualifying games — a number of which were enthralling , with wins at home against spain and away against norway , were not available to view for many people other than those fortunate enough to be able to go to the match itself or able to pay for viaplay . that is as unfair and unjust as a refereeing error or var review which punishes your team . it has meant that scots fans have missed out on the well - earned success of their team . even worse , when these euro finals are past and the qualifiers for the world cup in north america begin , scots will again be deprived of the opportunity to watch their team on free - to - air tv . the games go on as another competition beckons , but many scots are excluded from watching their team ’s journey , and that is neither right nor fair . it is not the norm in europe , where only seven countries including scotland and northern ireland are in this situation ; nor is it the case in england , where qualifying games have been free to air on itv or channel 4 since 2018 . even in wales , where rights to the national team ’s qualifying fixtures were also sold to viaplay in 2022 , access was available free to air on s4c. the charging for viewing extends from the major competitions even to friendly fixtures . while they may lack the same bite as the competitive games , many wish to see their heroes perform or new stars be given an opportunity , but the four friendly fixtures arranged for scotland ’s warm - up for germany are all to be behind a pay wall on viaplay , so even these non - competitive fixtures will be denied to many scottish fans . meanwhile , england ’s warm - up will be broadcast free to view on channel 4 . the anomaly between scotland and england international matches extends beyond the men ’s international team . for the women ’s game , itv has the rights to the english national team , having recently taken over from the bbc . scotland games are shown on bbc alba , a channel i know and enjoy but which , although free to view , has neither the reach nor the resource of the bigger channels . indeed , i have seen scottish and english fixtures going head to head on the bbc and bbc alba . why is there pan - uk coverage of the england game , but restricted access to the scottish one ? similarly , the bbc holds the rights to england under-21 internationals while scotland ’s are left to the scottish football association website , which shows that it is not just in respect of the men ’s team but across genders and ages that scots are being deprived of the right to watch their national team . those fixtures also matter to fans . the scottish football press were once described as fans with typewriters ; now it seems to be the uk broadcasters who are fans with tv stations , but while the scottish press supported the scottish team , the uk broadcasters only seem to support england . uk broadcasters are revealing themselves not as uk television outlets , but as team england only . that is happening whether we are talking about the state - funded bbc , publicly owned channel 4 , or the commercial itv or stv channels that have broadcasting obligations beyond the border . some may blame the scottish football association , which sold the rights to viaplay . let me say at the outset that i do not hold the sfa responsible ; culpability rests with broadcasters , who have not just rights but duties , and who are failing scotland . the sfa has a duty to the game in scotland . that responsibility runs from the grassroots and football simply being a game to be enjoyed by youngsters , through developing pathways for people to continue playing at whatever age or standard , and on to those entering into the professional ranks and , ultimately , the pinnacle of the national team . the sfa is also required to nurture and develop not just the men ’s game , but the growing women ’s game and football among people of different ages and capacities . the men ’s and women ’s international teams are the pinnacle , but the sfa ’s remit covers all . all that comes at a cost , however , and the sfa is required to fund it . money is tight for associations , as it is for individuals . broadcasting money that applies in nations such as ireland when premier league games south of the border are shown is denied to scotland . the reason is that the uk is classed as one broadcasting entity and international football divergence is of no relevance . hence a cash - strapped sfa needs to maximise income , and the rights to show the national teams ’ fixtures are its major asset . viaplay offers more . it is something the sfa is required to do to promote the game from grassroots to international teams . what about broadcasters ? why can the bbc , channel 4 and itv all have budgets to pay for england games , but not for scottish ones ? it is not that the sfa is seeking more than the fa — quite the opposite . the viewing rights fee for scotland matches is significantly lower than for england matches , just as transfer fees in the scottish premier leagues are lower than those in the english premier league . but while uk broadcasters are prepared to pay top dollar to show england games , they are not prepared to fund a bawbee for a scotland game . indeed , that was stated by simon pitts of stv when he gave evidence to the scottish affairs committee . he said that there was “ very little prospect of a larger commercial return uk - wide , which in turn determines the level of bid . ” scots tv licence fees do not , therefore , matter , and obligations to scots viewers count for little . the licence fee paid by scots and the rights given in scotland to uk broadcasters are not being matched by coverage . that is why this bill is necessary . it must be mandatory that scotland ’s games should be available , and broadcasters must live up to their obligations . scots fans have a right to see their team and to expect no less from their broadcasters . question put and agreed to . ordered , that kenny macaskill , neale hanvey , angus brendan macneil , douglas chapman , martyn day , carol monaghan and jamie stone present the bill . kenny macaskill accordingly presented the bill . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on considered in committee i beg to move amendment 12 , page 1 , line 3 , at end insert — “ ( 1za ) the oga must not invite any new seaward area production application licences until the secretary of state has by regulations brought into effect a ban on flaring and venting relating to new offshore installations other than that required in an emergency . ( 1zb ) the secretary of state must by regulation make such provision so that the oga is only permitted to invite seaward area production application licences after 2030 once a prohibition is in place on routine flaring and venting for all offshore installations operating in uk waters . ( 1zc ) a statutory instrument containing regulations under subsections ( 1za ) and ( 1zb ) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either house of parliament . ( 1zd ) in subsection ( 1za ) and ( 1zb ) — ‘ flaring ’ means the burning of hydrocarbons produced during oil and gas extraction ; ‘ venting ’ means the release of un - combusted hydrocarbons directly into the atmosphere . ” this amendment prevents the invitation of new seaward area production application licences until the secretary of state has introduced a ban on flaring and venting by new offshore installations . it also requires the secretary of state to prevent licensing rounds from 2030 if a wider ban is not in place . with this it will be convenient to discuss the following : amendment 15 , page 1 , line 3 , at end insert — “ ( 1za ) the oga must not invite any new seaward area production application licences until the secretary of state has by regulations brought into effect a requirement that — ( a ) all new seaward area production application licences require a specific field commitment of a net zero carbon footprint reached through developing the carbon capture utilisation and storage network or such other means as deemed appropriate ; and ( b ) a percentage , to be specified in regulations but not less than 30 per cent , of all new seaward area production application licences specifically align petroleum extraction with the refining of petroleum at the grangemouth oil refinery . ( 1zb ) a statutory instrument containing regulations under subsections ( 1za ) is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either house of parliament . ” amendment 7 , page 1 , line 4 , leave out “ in each relevant year ” and insert “ on a case - by - case basis ” . amendment 2 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the climate test ( see section 4zd ) ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 3 , sets out the climate test to be applied by the oil and gas authority before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 8 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the energy and job security test ( see section 4zd ) ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 9 , introduces a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 10 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the just transition test ( see section 4zd ) ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 11 , introduces a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 13 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the just transition plans test ( see section 4zd ) ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 14 , introduces a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 17 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the climate change test ( see section 4zd ) ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 18 , sets out the climate change test to be applied by the oil and gas authority before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 22 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the home energy efficiency test ( see section 4zd ) . ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 24 , introduces a home energy efficiency test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward area production licences . amendment 23 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the energy charter test ( see section 4zd ) . ” this paving amendment , together with amendment 25 , introduces an energy charter test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward area production licences . amendment 19 , page 2 , line 1 , after “ of ” leave out “ liquefied ” . this amendment , together with amendment 20 , would require the carbon intensity of domestic natural gas to be assessed against the carbon intensity of all natural gas imported into the uk . amendment 20 , page 2 , line 7 , leave out “ liquefied ” . this amendment , together with amendment 19 , would require the carbon intensity of domestic natural gas to be assessed against the carbon intensity of all natural gas imported into the uk . amendment 21 , page 2 , line 24 , at end insert — “ ( 4a ) within six months of the commencement of this act , the secretary of state must produce and lay before parliament a report on the effect of amending the definition of “ carbon intensity ” as set out in subsection ( 4 ) according to section 93 of the climate change act 2008 . ” this amendment requires the secretary of state to report how the carbon intensity test is affected if the definition of carbon intensity were amended to include emissions of gases other than carbon dioxide in line with the carbon dioxide equivalent measure in section 93 of the 2008 climate change act . amendment 3 , page 3 , line 23 , at end insert — “ 4zd the climate test mentioned in s 4za the climate test is met in relation to a relevant year if the intergovernmental panel on climate change finds that current global fossil infrastructure will not emit more greenhouse gases than is compatible with limiting global heating to 1.5 degrees celsius . ” amendment 9 , page 3 , line 23 , at end insert — “ 4zd the energy and job security test mentioned in s 4za the energy and job security test is met in relation to a relevant year if the oga assesses that new licences will — ( a ) lower energy bills for households ; ( b ) deliver energy security and reduce reliance on imported fuel sources for domestic consumption ; ( c ) enhance sustained job security for the oil and gas workforce in areas of the uk economically reliant on the oil and gas sector ; ( d ) guarantee funding for domestic refineries to increase capacity to process sustainable fuel sources ; and ( e ) help the oil and gas sector meet commitments set out in the north sea transition deal . ” this amendment sets out a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 11 , page 3 , line 23 , at end insert — “ 4zd the just transition test mentioned in s 4za the just transition test is met in relation to a relevant year if the oga assesses that — ( a ) new licences will support the delivery of the north sea transition deal ’s greenhouse gas emission reduction targets of 10 % by 2025 , 25 % by 2027 and 50 % by 2030 against a 2018 baseline , to meet the sector ’s aim of a net zero basin by 2050 ; and ( b ) the secretary of state has provided funding to support the development of the renewable energy sector , in areas of the uk economically dependent on the oil and gas sector , equivalent to tax revenues collected from uk oil and gas production . ” this amendment sets out a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 14 , page 3 , line 23 , at end insert — “ 4zd the just transition plans test mentioned in s 4za ( 1 ) the just transition plans test is met in relation to a relevant year if the oga assesses that all existing seaward area production licence holders have published just transition plans for their workforce that are compatible with limiting global heating to 1.5 degrees celsius . ( 2 ) for the purposes of this section — “ just transition plans ” refer to plans agreed through formalised collective agreements with unions in the workplace for consultation on policy ; “ workforce ” includes workers , directly and indirectly ( sub - contracted or agency ) employed , or engaged through day - rate or self - employed contract models . ” amendment 18 , page 3 , line 23 , insert — “ 4zd the climate change test mentioned in 4za the climate change test is met in relation to a relevant year if the latest reports of the intergovernmental panel on climate change on the mitigation of climate change find that the granting of additional seaward area production licences is consistent with limiting warming to 1.5 ° c . ” this amendment sets out a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . amendment 24 , page 3 , line 23 , at end insert — “ 4zd the home energy efficiency test mentioned in s 4za the home energy efficiency test is met if the median rating in current energy performance certificates in the united kingdom falls within or above band b. ” this amendment sets out the home energy efficiency test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward area production licences . amendment 25 , page 3 , line 23 , at end insert — “ 4zd the energy charter test mentioned in s 4za the energy charter treaty test is met if the united kingdom has made arrangements to withdraw from the energy charter treaty . ” this amendment sets out the energy charter test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward area production licences . clause stand part . clause 2 stand part . new clause 2 — duty to introduce spatial prioritisation policy — “ after section 4 of the petroleum act 1998 insert — ‘ 4zaa duty to introduce spatial prioritisation policy ( 1 ) before the oga invites applications for seaward area production licences under this act the secretary of state must publish a marine spatial prioritisation policy . ( 2 ) the marine spatial prioritisation policy must establish a process for prioritising offshore renewables , marine protection , fishing activities , oil and gas licensing , and the achievement of relevant targets under the climate change act 2008 and the environment act 2021 in any relevant decisions relating to the marine environment made by a body undertaking public functions . ( 3 ) the oga must comply with the marine spatial prioritisation policy set out in subsection ( 1 ) when deciding applications relating to new seaward area production licences . ’ ” this new clause requires the secretary of state to publish a marine spatial prioritisation policy , taking into account relevant targets under the climate change act 2008 and the environment act 2021 . i refer the house to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . on second reading , i said that this bill was something of a distraction and not necessary on the basis that the north sea transition authority can already grant licences annually or , indeed , whenever it considers it necessary . that will not change with the bill . i also noted at the time that the two statutory tests in the bill have been designed in such a way that the computer always says yes to new oil and gas licences , but i also said that i would work with other like - minded colleagues to improve the bill and bring in further tests that need to be met before any new oil and gas production licences are granted . that is what i and other members have sought to do . amendment 12 seeks to do two things . first , it would stop the invitation of new production application licences until the secretary of state has introduced a ban on the flaring and venting of methane by new offshore installations . secondly , it would require the secretary of state to prevent licensing rounds from 2030 if a wider ban on flaring and venting is not in place . along with other members who have signed up to the amendment , i argue that this is an entirely reasonable ask that the government and all members should be able to get behind , given that all it modestly seeks to do is put into statute existing guidance on flaring and venting that was issued by the north sea transition authority . let me set out the precise wording of the principles that the nsta expects industry to follow in relation to flaring and venting across all uk continental shelf areas . first , “ flaring and venting and associated emissions should be at the lowest possible levels in the circumstances ” . secondly , there should be “ zero routine flaring and venting for all by 2030 ” . thirdly , “ all new developments should be planned and developed on the basis of zero routine flaring and venting . ” that is a set of nsta principles with which amendment 12 in entirely consistent . can my right hon . friend explain why it would be better to import liquefied natural gas , with four times the amount of co2 produced , rather than have our own gas ? his regulations would not apply to the foreign - produced gas we import . my right hon . friend makes an important point : lng has a higher carbon - intensity footprint . but the majority of the gas that we import comes by pipeline from norway , and the production intensity of norwegian gas is around half that of the uk ’s . will my right hon . friend give way ? if i may , i will continue . in their response last year to the environmental audit committee ’s report on accelerating the transition from fossil fuels and securing energy supplies , the government doubled down on the nsta position . responding to the eac recommendation , which called for the banning of flaring from uk installations , the government noted that they had already signed up to “ make every effort to ensure that routine flaring from existing oil fields ends as soon as possible , and no later than 2030 . ” the government response went on to highlight the nsta guidance that new developments are approved on the basis of zero routine flaring and venting . my right hon . friend the marginal gas we would import would come from qatar or the united states of america . there is not an infinite supply of norwegian gas , so my right hon . friend is missing the main point . with respect , i do not think i am missing the main point . the point that the government are pursuing is to ensure that we have less use of fossil fuels overall and that we expand our renewable capacity , including nuclear , which i know my right hon . friend supports . that is where we should be going with this strategy . the ban on flaring in norway is one of the key reasons that norway has become a leader in the cleaner production of oil and gas , which this government have clearly indicated that they also want for uk production . i am looking forward to hearing the minister ’s response to amendment 12 . i hope he will say that , given that it is consistent with government policy and guidance , the government will introduce a similar amendment in the other place . if they choose not to do that , i am pretty sure that a similar amendment will be tabled in the other place anyway , and that it is likely to be supported . i would just humbly observe that if the government whip against this or any similar amendment , either in this house or in the other place , they will put colleagues in the absurd position of effectively having to vote against existing government policy . i am really looking forward to listening to what the minister has to say . rose — order . we are in committee , so i remind members that the chair should be addressed by name or as “ chair ” or “ madam chair ” , as sir alok sharma did , and not as “ mr deputy speaker ” or “ madam deputy speaker ” . before i call the shadow minister , i want to make it clear that i will be calling those who have amendments down first and i will then move on to others , going from side to side . i would like to speak to our amendments 17 , 18 , 19 and 20 , to comment on other amendments before us today and then to place all this into the context of the bill as a whole by way of what will effectively be a stand - part contribution . this bill remains an ill - advised , pointless piece of political posturing — do n’t pull any punches ! that was the mild version . as we do not need this one - clause bill . we need instead a strategy for managing the north sea that supports our energy security , meets our climate commitments and secures the economic and jobs benefits of the transition to a low - carbon economy . we would have liked to debate a new clause setting out a new principal objective for the north sea transition authority that would have put such a strategy into effect . however , because the bill is so short and tightly drawn around the narrow issue of mandatory licensing rounds , amendments to put a more sensible strategy into place are regrettably not in order . we must therefore take the bill on its own terms , even if that means treating it with significantly more respect than the drafters have treated this house with in presenting such a trivial and nakedly political proposal . we have in the bill at present two tests that should be passed if the oil and gas authority is to proceed with mandatory licence issuance , and we know that the two tests can not be failed . it is a fact that if properly drafted — we might come to that in a moment — liquefied natural gas will always be more greenhouse gas - intensive in production than uk natural gas and we will always be in a position where gas and oil produced in the uk and in a declining north sea field will not meet our total demand for gas and oil . i learned in my first year at university — as i think the minister did , because he did a similar degree to me — that a proposition that can not be falsified can not stand as a valid proposition . here we have two completely non - valid propositions in the bill . they are bogus and cynically contrived to give the appearance that something has to be achieved before mandatory licencing takes place . at the very least we need a test or tests that can be failed and that produce a proper level of judgment into the advisability of proceeding with such mandatory licences . the best test surely has to be whether such action is compatible with our climate change goals . the government had previously introduced climate change compatibility tests into production generally . it is strange that these appear nowhere in the bill . the shadow minister has said that getting more of our own gas out of the north sea would help our security of supply and reduce co2 because it would displace imported lng , so why does he not support that proposition ? the proposition before us today is for mandatory licence rounds in a declining north sea field , which would make no difference in the long term to the total amount of gas that we get out of the north sea , as everybody knows . it would instead put us firmly on the back foot as far as international climate change discussions are concerned . that is the key issue that we need to address this afternoon . following on from the question from my right hon . friend it is labour ’s position that we do not wish to see new energy exploration licences issued for the future , but that does not mean that the north sea will not continue in production over a long period of time and provide a substantial amount of oil and gas for our domestic market . our first amendments , 17 and 18 , would introduce a new test that would safeguard the legally binding commitments that the uk and all other nations made in the paris agreement and have reaffirmed ever since . every credible independent analysis — the intergovernmental panel on climate change , the international energy agency , the climate change committee — shows that new exploration licences are not compatible with limiting warming and avoiding the worst of the devastating impact that climate change will have , and is having , around the world and here in the uk . the test that we have put in amendments 17 and 18 is possible if we have achieved or are achieving our climate change goals internationally . amendment 18 states : “ the climate change test is met in relation to a relevant year if the latest reports of the intergovernmental panel on climate change on the mitigation of climate change find that the granting of additional seaward area production licences is consistent with limiting warming to 1.5 ° c . ” no one who is serious about this can take that to mean that existing fields will not continue to produce for years to come — of course they will — but anyone who argues that business as usual and a few new licenses are the route to good , long - term jobs and energy security is frankly peddling a myth . we must accelerate the transition to new opportunities for north sea workers in the low - carbon economy , including through carbon capture , usage and storage , through hydrogen and through floating offshore wind . we do not believe that tests are the best route to achieving that goal . we need a holistic strategy , but within the framework set out in this bill , the climate change test we propose is the only way to achieve a policy that is consistent with being a responsible and leading actor on the world stage in the fight against climate change , with managing our existing north sea assets carefully and for the long - term , and with maximising the low - carbon economic potential of the north sea . the other two amendments i will speak to highlight the extent to which the bill fails even on the narrow terms it has set out . amendments 19 and 20 would address the glaring deficiencies in the bogus carbon intensity test set out by the government . currently , the test compares uk gas production carbon emissions only against an aggregate of liquefied natural gas production emissions , ignoring pipeline - delivered gas , which makes up most of our imports , as the right hon . member for reading west reminded us . this amendment would correct that . as it stands , the test is designed to be impossible to fail , so it is barely worthy of the name . including only lng is a serious logical flaw . before the minister jumps to his feet , it is not true to say that every marginal unit of imported gas must be lng . indeed , we support substantial amounts of natural gas coming into the uk via the pipeline from norway . the production of that gas is substantially cleaner than that of uk natural gas . apart from anything else , the bill takes no account of the uk ’s likely future gas demand profile . demand for gas will decline as we rapidly decarbonise our power sector and electrify more and more of our economy . indeed , this decline in demand , not just supply , is at the heart of a successful net zero transition . approving new exploration licences for fields that will take years to come online , on the assumption that the alternative must otherwise be lng , without taking any account of future demand , is absurd . a fairer test would consider gas imports in the round . i take on board the hon . gentleman ’s comment that , overall , 30 % of our gas comes from norway . yes , that is the majority of our imports , but it is still 30 % overall . nobody in this house has authority over norway ’s future oil and gas prospects , but would he be in favour of the norwegian government exploring for new oil and gas to supply to us ? no , in line with the iea and the ipcc , i am not in favour of new exploration licences . the point is that , in a declining market , norwegian supply will continue to be very substantial , even if no new exploration licences are granted in norway . the figure cited by the hon . gentleman is almost right — the actual figure is 34 % . the united kingdom supplies 38 % of its own gas , with the united states supplying 14 % , qatar supplying 9 % and other countries supplying smaller amounts . norway already occupies a very substantial position in our present gas supplies , and i am sure it will continue to do so . does the hon . gentleman agree that it might be useful to remind conservative members that , according to the un production gap report , governments are already planning for their existing developments to produce more than double the amount of fossil fuels in 2030 than is consistent with keeping global heating to 1.5 ° c or below ? the idea that anyone can have vast new developments is not compatible with keeping below our climate target . the hon . lady is absolutely right . new licences are an international issue . if we had new exploration licences around the world , we would simply produce far more oil and gas than is compatible with the 1.5 ° climate target . we should just keep it in the ground . finally , amendment 21 would go some way towards correcting another element of the carbon intensity test . as currently drafted — the minister will want to listen to this bit — the test will not take account of methane emissions , which is a serious flaw . the whole case for comparing uk - based natural gas with lng is based only on production emissions . the emission of methane at various stages of the production and transportation of lng is , in aggregate , worse than the emissions of uk - produced and piped natural gas , but they are not carbon dioxide emissions , which is what the bill says should be measured . lng ’s potential carbon dioxide emissions upon burning are roughly the same as , or perhaps slightly greater than , the carbon dioxide emissions from uk natural gas . as the right hon . member for reading west said , that is elevated by the current uk practice of flaring surplus gas , which can be measured in carbon dioxide emissions . methane is a much more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide over 20 - year and 100 - year timeframes . its lifetime in the atmosphere is shorter than the lifetime of co2 , but its impact is far more significant . the climate change act 2008 is quite specific on how this should be measured . section 93 , which the bill mentions but does not act on , states that “ greenhouse gas emissions … and removals of greenhouse gas from the atmosphere shall be measured or calculated in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent . ” proposed new section 4zb(1 ) of the petroleum act 1998 mentions the carbon intensity of natural gas , but proposed new subsection ( 3 ) defines “ carbon intensity ” as “ the carbon dioxide emissions attributable to its production ” . but carbon dioxide emissions in production are not the principal concern here , as the gas has not been burned at that point . indeed , i can conceive of smart climate lawyers challenging the test ’s validity on precisely that point . the minister might therefore see amendment 21 as providing a vital lifeline to the integrity of his bill . to that extent , the amendment might be seen as helpful , but i somehow doubt that he will take it up . to coin a phrase , “ it ’s the methane , stupid . ” the bill should say so . proposed new section 4zb(4 ) already gives the secretary of state the power to amend the carbon intensity test to include emissions other than carbon dioxide . perhaps the secretary of state or the minister will shortly take that up to save the test . we can anticipate a fairly amusing statutory instrument debate when he tries to do that . amendment 21 would simply require the government to produce a report analysing what the impact of that change will be . in the spirit of trying to improve a bill that , by design , is fairly resistant to improvement , we welcome the amendments tabled by the climate change committee and the environmental audit committee have called for a ban on routine flaring and venting , and such a ban is long overdue . a marine spatial prioritisation policy would help to organise and plan an optimal long - term , low - carbon economic strategy for the north sea . there is clearly significant strength of feeling across the committee that this is an inadequate bill , and some of the proposed tests could undoubtedly make a bad bill a little better , although some of those tests have internal problems . we would not want to vote against those tests , but the only comprehensive climate change and net zero compatible test is the one that we and , in principle , i rise to speak to new clause 2 on spatial prioritisation . the competing pressures on sea space mean there is essentially a spatial squeeze . i fully understand the bill ’s importance , as we all know that the oil and gas industry will have a key role as the uk transitions towards cleaner energy . the bill will provide reassurance to the industry . i am grateful that the government have stated that each annual licensing round will take place only if key emissions tests are met , to support the transition to net zero . i thank the minister and his team for their ongoing engagement on this issue but , as we seek to turn to renewables and clean energy , we need to ensure that we have the space and infrastructure to carry this forward , otherwise the energy transition will never come to fruition . i brought up this issue directly with the minister for food , farming and fisheries , my right hon . friend it was good to hear the fisheries minister ’s response about cross - departmental work to ensure that our fishermen have a future in the light of our need to expand our renewable energy sources , but there is an opportunity in this bill to ensure that we do not repeat these conversations as other energy sources compete for space in the precious waters around our coast . this will help not only the uk ’s energy security but our push towards renewable energy , which will support our fishing fleets and retain a simultaneous focus on biodiversity and improving the condition of marine protected areas . as a coastal mp , all these points are especially important to me . being an eternal optimist , i think we can do all these things simultaneously if we can plan strategically where we have the opportunity . my hon . friend is making some very good points , particularly on the spatial squeeze . she says that this is not a choice between one thing and another . opposition members tend to see this debate as black and white , and that we have to go in either one direction or the other . does she agree that , whether from the perspective of fishing , offshore wind or offshore oil and gas , it is very important that we come together so that everyone has a say ? as always , i agree with the points my hon . friend makes . prioritising space is critical , as the government have committed to delivering 50gw of offshore wind , which this represents approximately £ 93.3 billion - worth of investment and requires nearly 8,500 sq km of new marine space . i need to declare an interest , as the chair of the all - party group on the celtic sea . as such , my particular concern is about the deployment of floating offshore wind , as it will open up areas such as the celtic sea so that we can generate energy no matter which way the wind blows . as it can be deployed in waters deeper than 60 metres , that technology opens up 80 % of our offshore wind resources . the celtic sea is an environment where strategic planning at this early point in the development of flow — not just for spatial prioritisation on the seabed but for clear planning of cable routes to optimise how power transitions to the grid — minimises blue carbon disruption from our ocean floors and onshore environmental damage from multiple plug - in points . indeed , given the long - term commitment to energy generation in the celtic sea , as well as the north sea , the chance to plan strategically and include all future leases within a national framework comes now . more renewable energy and greater energy efficiency contribute more to energy security than new oil and gas . this integrated spatial planning will require new licences to ensure that enough sea space is allocated for nature recovery and climate change mitigation . otherwise , there is a risk that industrial activities could crowd out those important environmental purposes , which , with the right strategic planning early enough in the evolution of these vital new technologies , can coexist alongside those that are now waning . currently , the bill has no provisions to require spatial prioritisation testing of the geographical blocks that become available for oil and gas search and production . that means that the north sea transition authority will be able to grant new licences in areas of the sea where the cumulative impact of activities is incompatible with the achievement of government targets in the climate change act 2008 and the environment act 2021 . does my hon . friend accept that in several cases potentially useful oil and gas deposits in the north sea are adjacent to existing pipes and existing development production platforms , so one great advantage would be that the infrastructure is already in place and it has spare capacity because of the decline of traditional fields ? that would be far less intrusive , would it not ? my right hon . friend makes a valid point . however , for me , this is about opening up that conversation and making sure that these things are considered in the round . if we are going to put an extra pipe in , we should consider what we are offsetting somewhere else . polling found that 80 % of the uk public believe our ocean protection laws must be strengthened , and i know how important our waters are to the residents of north devon and the wider uk . we must ensure that we do all we can on this , while understanding the vital role that oil and gas plays and will play in our energy security . spatial prioritisation is important to ensure that continuing to drive forward our new green energies is not done at the expense of our traditional industries , such as fishing , and gives due consideration to the marine environment , which we on land owe so much to and are still finding out more about . balance and optimisation are the objective of this amendment , and i hope the minister will consider this opportunity , so that we really can have it all and decarbonise our energy , improve our biodiversity , support our fishermen and improve our energy security . i call the scottish national party spokesman . i rise to speak to amendments 7 , 8 and 10 , which have been tabled by the snp . i note that no substantive changes have been made to the bill ’s provisions since we discussed it some weeks ago in this place ; it is no more responsive to the needs of the climate , the energy sector in scotland or bill payers who are haemorrhaging money on their energy bills . we know , from the appropriation of scotland ’s energy wealth by thatcher in the 1980s , cameron ’s “ cut the green crap ” at the beginning of this conservative regime , and the weak - minded and politically naive rolling back of the green transition measures by the current prime minister , that time and time again , the tories will never look after ordinary workers , scotland or the environment . my hon . friend is making an excellent start to his speech . does he agree that it is outrageous that the prime minister has masqueraded this legislation as a way of reducing energy bills for consumers , given that even the secretary of state could not defend those claims ? does he also agree that this government ’s only intention is to unlock as much tax revenue from the north sea oil and gas sector as possible and that no consideration has been given to reducing domestic energy bills , to energy security or to reaching our climate commitments ? i agree entirely with my hon . friend . she touches on some of the key elements that i will address in this speech . in order to salvage some semblance of responsibility and/or equity from this bill , i urge members to support the snp ’s amendments . they seek to amend the provisions to facilitate licence issuance on a case - by - case basis , rather than it being done annually and by prescription . that is a reasonable improvement to the bill by any measure . we would also like to incorporate a real test for new issuance that would require the north sea transition authority to assess whether new licences will : lower energy bills for bill payers ; deliver energy security and reduce reliance on imported fuel sources for domestic consumption ; enhance sustained job security for the oil and gas workforce in areas of the uk that are economically reliant on the oil and gas sector ; guarantee funding for domestic refineries to increase capacity to process sustainable fuel sources ; and stimulate the north sea oil and gas sector to meet commitments set out in the north sea transition deal . the snp also wishes to ensure that , henceforth , 100 % of tax revenues from oil and gas are invested in the just transition . a “ just transition ” test would have to be met for any given relevant year , under which the nsta would issue new licences only if it assesses that : they will support the delivery of the north sea transition deal ’s greenhouse gas emission reduction targets of 10 % by 2025 , 25 % by 2027 and 50 % by 2030 against a 2018 baseline , in order to meet the sector ’s aim of a net zero basin by 2050 ; and the secretary of state has provided funding to support the development of the renewable energy sector in areas of the uk that are economically dependent on the oil and gas sector , equivalent to tax revenues collected from uk oil and gas production . that amendment means that new licences can not be issued unless it can be shown that the licence will meet the north sea transition deal ’s greenhouse gas emission reduction targets , and unless the uk government are funding the renewables sector in oil and gas dependent areas to at least the value of oil and gas revenues . the hon . gentleman is speaking about conditions for granting new licences , but the snp ’s draft energy strategy includes a presumption against any new licences — is that his position ? is the snp ’s position that there should be no new licences for oil and gas exploration ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for that . it is lovely to see him in his place ; we know that he is a busy man with his other two jobs . i am sure that hansard will correct me if my memory does not serve me correctly , but i believe that we rehearsed this issue on second reading . let me point out to the hon . gentleman , who i am certain is an ardent unionist , that the position of the devolved government , and whoever they are , is irrelevant in debating what we do with oil and gas licences in the uk because , sadly , scotland ’s oil and gas endowment , as he well knows — he makes excuses for this regularly — is controlled remotely by a dysfunctional uk government , whoever they are . so the point is moot . will the hon . gentleman allow me to intervene , just to provide clarity ? no , i will not . the last snp amendment will prevent this government and the soon - to - be - installed labour government from simply using scotland ’s north sea oil and gas revenues to fund tax cuts in the uk , a state that is demonstrably not paying its way in the world . both labour and tory — two cheeks of the same face , where scotland is concerned — will sacrifice scotland ’s economic , industrial and material welfare , and those working in the energy sector , if it will win them a few more seats in this place . they have done it before and they will do it again while we remain in this broken and discredited union . the prosperity that comes from oil and gas in scotland is finite . i was not sure if the hon . gentleman had moved on from his glowing appraisal of the north sea transition deal , but can i take it from his reference to that deal that the snp ’s position is to support and welcome it in its entirety ? i am not going to meet the hon . gentleman ’s ambition to nail those colours to the mast , but i will tell him that through the bill , the uk government are turning a blind eye to the implications of a free - for - all when it comes to emissions and who benefits from revenue receipts . i am sorry if he finds that difficult , but he will to have to deal with it . the prosperity that comes from oil and gas in scotland is finite , as we know all too well . we have seen what deindustrialisation with no transition plan looks like — we witnessed it at first hand in the 1980s , when coal , steel and heavy industries were all torn asunder on the altar of monetarism and share prices in the city of london . that is set to happen again for oil and gas , under thatcher ’s willing disciples , the leader of the labour party and the prime minister . we can not allow that to happen again . it is therefore essential that north - east scotland and other areas reliant on oil and gas are afforded the investment required . that is what our amendment speaks to ; it is about creating new jobs and transitioning in a managed , strategic fashion to accelerate our post - carbon future . on that point , will the hon . gentleman give way ? no . that is a just ambition for a just transition . the billions of pounds still to be yielded from oil and gas revenue must not be wasted on doomed capital infrastructure projects , such as hs2 , or used to fund exorbitant false economies , such as nuclear power stations in england . it is a moral and economic imperative that revenue be used to accelerate a genuine just transition , to protect jobs . in response to my previous intervention , the hon . gentleman said that the scottish national party position on this issue was “ irrelevant ” , but of course it is not ; it is vitally important . the snp ’s draft energy strategy says there is a presumption against new exploration for oil and gas . does he support that ? that question speaks to a mis - representation . there is no point in giving way to the hon . gentleman if he is going to misrepresent me in that way . what i actually said was that it does not matter who is in government in a devolved assembly where energy policy is decided by remote control from a dysfunctional westminster government . that is the beginning and the end of it . if the hon . gentleman does not like it , then he is welcome to join the snp — well , perhaps not . we know the facts on the ground : the oil and gas sector is in decline because of finite reserves , and because it is to be considered an industry with a limited future , whereas the green transition has an unlimited future . jobs have already decreased in the sector . government members are giving the impression that with unlimited licensing there will be unlimited jobs , but that is not the case . jobs have decreased by 228,000 since 2013 , despite 400 new drilling licences in five separate auction rounds . production of gas in the north sea has already fallen by two thirds since 2000 and will fall a further 95 % with new licences , as opposed to 97 % without . the issuance of new licences in and of itself will not shift the dial , especially if the revenues from scottish oil and gas continue to disappear into the black hole that is the treasury . what is needed is a wholesale redistribution of fiscal receipts from scottish oil and gas to the renewable transition , ringfenced and guaranteed by statute . in scotland , we are apt to wonder what we got for the £ 300 billion in tax receipts from scotland ’s oil — a question now being mirrored for our renewable endowment . i note that members on the government benches have desisted from repeating the nonsense that energy bills will be lowered if we grant unlimited licences — and not before time . what will lower bills is ensuring that the renewable energy we generate can find its way to consumers without needing to be turned off because the grid can not cope after 14 years of non - investment by the tories . new grid infrastructure will lower bills by dialling gas out of the system . government members talk about the relentless need for more and more gas , as if that does not speak to a flaky ambition on a just transition ; it exposes it and lays it bare . we will dial gas out of the system by having a network that can connect scotland ’s renewable energy to the market where that is required , and we will do so with proper investment in sub - sea lines , rather than by scarring scotland with 80 - metre pylons . it is a pity that the uk government would not invest the billions that they are ploughing into nuclear into environmentally optimal grid improvements , instead of defaulting to pylons and overhead lines . the bill is part of an ill - fated tory miscalculation on making a just transition a wedge issue . we know that , because the bill is a non - existent solution to a non - existent problem . some 27 new licences were granted in 2023 , and a licensing round has been held by the north sea transition authority every year and a half since 2016 . if the bill is the answer , then i am not certain what the question is . it undermines the independence of the nsta by forcing it to hold new oil licensing rounds every year , whereas currently the nsta undertakes licensing rounds when it deems that they are required . it is a challenge so unwelcome that the nsta board unanimously agreed that this legislation and the annual licensing rounds were unnecessary . this is what happens when the energy sector , so vital to a broad - based , developed economy like scotland ’s , is subject to remote control . renewables already account for the equivalent of 113 % of scotland ’s gross electricity consumption , yet we still pay sky - high energy bills because of the amount of gas required for generation in england , due in no small part to the tories small - minded hysteria surrounding onshore wind , and their 10 - year - old ban on development of onshore . investing further in the green hydrogen sector in scotland could support up to 300,000 jobs — it is a pity that members on the government benches will not focus on that opportunity — and it would add up to £ 25 billion to scotland ’s gross value added by 2045 . further development of our renewable sector represents an extraordinary export opportunity for scotland — one that we must grab much more , instead of looking back ; we should look to the enterprises of the future . the hon . gentleman rightly mentions the sky - high energy prices that people in scotland face , even though scotland generates so much energy . what role does he think zonal and modal energy market modelling , rather than a one - size - fits - all , uk - wide approach , would play in substantially reducing energy costs in the likes of sutherland in scotland , and also in england , in places like surrey ? everybody would be a winner if we moved away from the uk - wide model and towards the zonal and modal method . the hon . gentleman raises an interesting question . there has been a lack of investment , and the network that delivers energy around gb was designed for a small number of very large generators . it is ill - equipped to deal with many smaller systems of generation . that is why we find ourselves switching off wind turbines and , where the demand still exits , replacing them with gas , much to all our constituents ’ cost and misery . the failure to transition in the electricity distribution network across gb is exactly the same failure we see in our dependency and desire to keep looking backwards . we should transition from hydrocarbons to renewables in a way that respects communities . in closing , we should grasp scotland ’s bright future with both hands . in so doing , we will rid ourselves of the mismanagement of successive uk governments in westminster . before i bring in some of those who may not have tabled amendments , i remind members that we are at committee stage , so discussion is of the amendments . however , as we are also discussing clauses 1 and 2 stand part , there is perhaps a little more scope . as i mentioned on second reading , the bill is of particular interest to me because the oil and gas industry has played a significant role as a major employer in the waveney and lowestoft area for nearly 60 years . moreover , the offshore wind industry and other low - carbon energy technologies , such as nuclear and hydrogen , will provide exciting local job - creating opportunities for generations to come . dame rosie , i also chair the british offshore oil and gas industry all - party parliamentary group . as i mentioned in the debate on in the previous debate , i highlighted that one of the conservative government ’s most notable achievements in recent years was the creation in 2016 of the oil and gas authority , which now operates as the north sea transition authority and which has correctly acknowledged that the delivery of net zero is its core mission . i also expressed the worry that the bill undermines the independence of the nsta . it is through this prism , dame rosie , that i consider these amendments , many of which are well reasoned and well intentioned . the nsta ’s work on delivering net zero derives , as we have heard , from the north sea transition deal , which was an agreement between the uk government and the oil and gas industry facilitated by the nsta . this should be the forum through which the amendments before us today are negotiated . by pursuing this partnership approach , we shall retain the confidence of an industry , which , as i have mentioned previously , is globally footloose and which we need to deliver net zero and to secure the enormous job opportunities that are potentially available . last month , the east of england energy group published its five core principles for energy in the east of england . it also set out what is needed from government so that it can deliver its vision . its requirements included a stable fiscal policy , so as to boost investor confidence and project progression , and stable and predictable regulations and policy mechanisms that foster investor confidence and support energy security and the uk ’s progress on meeting its decarbonisation targets . it is against those parameters that we should judge the amendments . i would add that the opposition ’s green prosperity plan has alarmed industry and places at risk the inward investment that is so badly needed . however , that is a debate for another day . on second reading , i suggested that we should consider a more ambitious climate compatibility checkpoint and bring forward a ban on routine venting and flaring . those are sensible ambitions , as i have said , but they do need to be worked up in conjunction and partnership with the nsta and industry , and not imposed on them . on amendment 12 and new clause 2 , it should be added that the nsta has a good track record with regard to both venting and flaring and marine spatial planning . my hon . friend mentioned the role of the nsta in the facilitation and delivery of the north sea transition deal , which , as he said , was negotiated between industry and the uk government . does he agree that what he is advocating is precisely the purpose of the north sea transition deal — to facilitate the delivery of energy transition to net zero ? my hon . friend is quite right : the north sea transition deal is the foundation stone on which we should be building , involving industry , involving the nsta and giving industry the confidence to make the significant investment that we need . the north sea transition deal includes the target to cut greenhouse gases and emissions by 10 % by 2025 and by 25 % by 2027 . the nsta wants to halve emissions by 2030 . it is also committed to all new developments having no routine flaring and venting , with zero routine flaring across all north sea platforms , whether new or existing , by 2030 at the latest . good progress is being made . although figures are not yet available for 2023 , emissions were reduced by 23 % between 2018 and 2022 , while flaring has been reduced by 50 % over the same period . in addition to tracking , monitoring and reporting performance , the nsta closely scrutinises operators ’ applications for flaring consents , pushes back against requests to increase flaring , and has ordered operators to restrict production to stay within agreed limits . it has , where necessary , issued fines for breaches . on marine spatial planning , the nsta follows a precautionary approach and is acutely aware of the need for co - ordination and collaboration in what are increasingly crowded and sometimes very sensitive and precious waters . it is thus working closely with such organisations as the crown estate and the marine management organisation in delivering the marine spatial prioritisation programme of the department for environment , food and rural affairs . in conclusion , the bill and the amendments raise very important matters , but to tackle them properly , we need to adopt a long - term approach that transcends the four - to - five - year political cycle and that fully involves business . i rise to support amendments 17 and 19 , and to speak to my amendments 22 and 24 on energy efficiency tests and amendments 23 and 25 on the energy charter treaty . let me start with amendment 25 . at the moment , the energy charter treaty , of which we are a member , is a failed international treaty . it binds us to any contract that we sign for oil , gas or any energy . once it is signed , we can not get out of it without paying the hope value of that contract . what i mean by the hope value is that a member does not pay the actual material value if it wants to stop that contract now ; it has to pay all the potential value of that contract if the oilfield , for example , were fully exploited . the treaty has cost other european countries billions and billions of pounds when they have tried to implement climate mitigation policies . it is dangerous , because the decisions are made not by british courts or by international courts with a british judge , but by secretive tribunals where the corporations get to appoint the people who make the deliberations . it is so outrageous that european union members have agreed to withdraw en masse — they are currently negotiating on how to do so in a co - ordinated way — and to do side letters with each other to ensure they are not bound by the 25 - year clause under which any extant licences that have been signed must continue to be honoured , even after withdrawal . what has that got to do with this ? because if we sign more licences while we are still part of the energy charter treaty , the minister is binding the hands of future generations . if we withdrew from the energy charter treaty , as our allies and partners are trying to do , and then decided to award new licences , future governments and generations could , without penalty , withdraw or reduce those licences . that very much relates to the bill , because i am saying : “ if you want to do this for short - term gain”—i do not believe the government ’s premise to start with—“at least allow future generations and governments to come and fix your mess ; do not bind their hands under international treaties . ” i think that that is relevant to the awarding of new licences . the fact that so many countries are fleeing the energy charter treaty means that this is the moment to negotiate with our partners to work out a new way forward . the british government themselves accept that the energy charter treaty has failed . they have tried to make significant amendments to it to allow flexibility on climate change goals . it has not been possible to amend it , which is why european partners are trying to withdraw . this test would do two things . not only would it avoid binding future generations , but it would put a rocket up the derrière of our ministers and departments to ensure that they fulfil the pledge of reform or withdrawal , which is a pledge that we have already made . let me address amendments 22 and 24 on the energy efficiency test for home heating . in reality , the biggest proportion of domestic energy is spent on home heating . huge domestic bills will not be solved one iota by the bill , as the minister has admitted , because the product will be sold on the international market and the marginal price at which we buy it back will still be inflated . our electricity market , which is linked to that marginal price , will continue to be inflated . the best and most efficient way to reduce energy bills and the demand and need for gas — the way that we all know needs to happen — is to ensure that our homes meet decent energy efficiency standards . the amendments set out that the government need to redouble their efforts to ensure energy efficiency before we commit to and invest in new licences for offshore drilling , and that we need a median rating of band b in energy performance . at the moment , c is seen as standard and d is common in private rentals . privately let homes are the worst in the sector , and greater help is needed . we can not continue to rely on government programmes that do not touch the sides . we need a proper approach in which we go street by street with councils and local government , fully funded by central government , with clawbacks in future years . however , we can not expect our citizens to pay a penny out of their pockets up front . homeowners are already overstretched , with huge additional bills , in a mortgage market that has been destroyed by the government . they can not afford an extra cent , an extra penny , for home improvements . that all needs to be covered by the government . my amendments would incentivise the government to do that and to ensure that we have made every effort to reduce gas demand before we go ahead with the foolish endeavour of drilling more oil and gas , which will not reduce prices , will not stop fuel poverty in this country and will not deal with any of our long - lasting problems . it would be a sticking plaster that does not even stick . i worked with the opposition front benchers on amendment 17 , which sets out the climate change test , so i am delighted that they have tabled it . a similar amendment has been tabled by my constituency neighbour , i remember phrases from the anti - war movement , such as , “ you ca n’t bomb for peace , ” and another about not being able to do something for virginity . it feels to me that this is a very similar thing : we are trying to do something that is the very opposite of what we want to achieve . if the government want to be committed to their climate targets , and if they think that more licences are needed , they need to ensure that those licences actively achieve our net zero targets . i am afraid that the bill will not do that . it will make things worse , energy bills will continue to be high , and it will ensure that we are bound for a generation . that is why all my amendments should be supported . i am sure that we will push the opposition front - bench amendments to a vote . i rise to speak in support of the bill and of all the employees of companies right across the country , including in my banff and buchan constituency , that will play a critical and successful role in the uk ’s ongoing energy transition to net zero by 2050 . i remind the committee that , for 25 years prior to being elected in 2017 , i worked in the energy sector — in the oil and gas sector specifically — in a wide range of roles for several different companies and in various places around the world . i also declare that i have a close family member with a financial interest in one of those companies , which is below the threshold required for registering interests . i can also assure the committee that that financial interest has never had , and will never have , any bearing on my contributions in this or any other debate . on second reading , i spoke about the potential for increased confidence and certainty that the bill brings to the energy industry . for many people watching , including a few hon . and right hon . members in this place , there would appear to be a perfectly polarised distinction between maximising oil and gas on one hand and promoting renewables on the other . the truth exists on a continuum between those two extremes , however . we have in fact been on a transition away from the most polluting of fossil fuels towards cleaner , lower - carbon , renewable sources of energy for a number of decades now . that transition is happening at various rates in different parts of the world , but it is fair to say that the united kingdom is at the forefront , as the first major economy not only to legislate for net zero but to set the most stringent decarbonisation targets . the conservative government have presided over the uk ’s becoming the first major economy to have reduced carbon emissions by 50 % from 1990 levels . that compares to only 7 % that had been achieved by the time the conservatives came to power in 2010 . we have effectively transitioned away completely from coal power , and continue to reduce our demand for oil and gas and increase our renewable and low - carbon capacity , but not as fast as our domestic supplies will continue to decline , even with new production . a critical point that needs to be reinforced in considering this legislation is that new oil and gas does not mean more oil and gas — a mistake that i heard in the speech of the arguments for producing our own oil and gas closer to home have been well rehearsed . there is the obvious benefit of having that source of energy under our control , not that of other states and countries that are not always friendly . we have also heard how liquefying natural gas for transportation and shipping that lng halfway around the world to then be de - liquefied back into gas when it arrives in the uk can produce up to four times the carbon emissions of domestically produced gas . we know from the climate change committee that we are likely still to be up to 25 % dependent on oil and gas by 2050 . it therefore follows that carbon capture , utilisation and storage will be required for the uk to reach net zero by 2050 . that includes , of course , the acorn ccs and hydrogen project at st fergus in my constituency , and in particular the role it will play in decarbonising gas - fired power generation at peterhead . what will also be required to get to net zero are precisely those skills , technologies and supply chains that currently exist and will , no doubt , continue to be developed within the oil and gas industry . however , those critical elements would sadly no longer be available to us if we shut down our domestic oil and gas industry prematurely , which is what would happen if the opposition parties had their way , whether it is the snp ’s “ presumption of no new exploration ” for oil and gas — a direct quote of the snp ’s draft energy strategy — or labour ’s “ just stop oil ” approach . i am seeing some nods of agreement from across the floor , but there has recently been something of a war of words between the two main parties — i am referring to labour and the snp — in scotland following labour ’s screeching u - turn on its £ 28 billion a year green investment plan . of course , we on the conservative benches always saw that plan as undeliverable without massive tax increases . labour announced that it would not only increase the energy profits levy and make it last longer , but remove the investment allowance . will the hon . gentleman give way ? before i give way , i will gently point out to opposition front benchers — i am not sure whether they are aware of this — that the 78 % tax rate they are so keen to copy from norway comes with an equivalent 78 % investment allowance in that country . labour ’s plans would remove the investment allowance , putting future investment across the energy sector even further at risk . of course , as we heard earlier , labour still maintains its position of banning all new oil and gas licences , which has inevitably led to an outcry from the sector in recent weeks . among others , offshore energies uk ’s chief executive david whitehouse has said : “ we remain deeply concerned about what labour ’s proposals could do to our people . if we ca n’t get companies to invest here , there are no jobs . it ’s that simple . ” he went on to describe labour ’s proposals as “ a hammer blow to the energy we need today and to the homegrown transition to cleaner energies that everyone in the uk wants to see . ” that is the key point , which often goes over the heads of so many on the opposition benches : the skills and technologies to deliver net zero are not going to appear magically over the horizon , and the talent and expertise in what would become a defunct oil and gas industry will not automatically and immediately transfer across to the renewables sector . more likely , companies and their employees who will find themselves squeezed out of oil and gas in the uk will simply move overseas to deliver someone else ’s energy security and someone else ’s energy transition — and , no doubt , deliver oil and gas that we would end up having to import . of course , the snp has come out of the woodwork to jump on the bandwagon , criticising labour ’s approach while completely contradicting its previous stance and — more than likely — that of its scottish green coalition partners in holyrood . snp leader humza yousaf said last september that he did not want scotland to be europe ’s oil and gas capital , presumably wishing to pass that mantle to our north sea neighbours in norway . a little over a year ago in its draft energy strategy , the snp stated — i quote again — that there should be a “ presumption ” against new exploration for oil and gas . i am not sure whether i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for taking my intervention , even though it was about five minutes ago on a different subject . he made a really interesting point in his speech : that new licences do not mean more oil and gas . conversely , having a more circumspect and rational approach to licence issuance — taking it out of the political arena and putting it into the bureaucratic space — does not mean less oil and gas . i am sure the hon . gentleman will accept that if that is true for one , it is true for the other . does he not agree with my position , and that of my party , that as the oil and gas industry continues on its journey to its natural conclusion of a much reduced industry , for whatever reason — the transition to renewables , or depleted resources — it is much more important , and in fact elegant , to make sure that those tax receipts are invested in the energy of the future , not squandered by his majesty ’s treasury ? i find myself looking for a point that i might agree with in the hon . gentleman ’s intervention , and sadly failing . however , his point about the decline of oil and gas in the uk has been made time and time again . ever since 2004 we have been a net importer of oil and gas , so my point about new oil and gas not being more oil and gas is about managing that decline to make up for the fact that we are not replacing that oil and gas generation with renewables as fast as we would like . i will address that point in more detail in a moment . those comments from the snp leader just go to show the staggering hypocrisy and inconsistency of the snp , but neither the industry nor the electorate are so easily fooled , particularly in the north - east of scotland . if asked whether they support new oil and gas licences , as we have seen today , some snp members — and , i dare say , some labour members as well — may find it difficult to commit to a position , particularly when facing their constituents in the north - east of scotland . however , this conservative government and , in particular , the scottish conservatives have maintained consistent support for the oil and gas industry — the companies , and the tens of thousands employed from right across the uk . we recognise , as this bill does , the potential for the people in this industry not just to keep our lights on and keep the economy moving in the near term , but to lead the world in showing how a successful energy transition from oil and gas to renewables can be done . sadly , as has been confirmed a couple of times today , all his majesty ’s opposition seem able to offer is to lead the world in virtue signalling . in following i rise to speak in support of my amendments that have been selected for debate : amendments 2 , 3 , 13 and 14 . before i begin in earnest , i want to emphasise that seeking to amend this sham of a bill in no way legitimises what is nothing more than a political stunt . it is not a serious piece of legislation ; rather , it is a desperate and dangerous attempt to create yet another culture war . it will make no practical difference at all , given that there have been annual licensing rounds for most of the past decade , with even the board of the north sea transition authority expressing the unanimous view that this legislation is not needed . the amendments i have tabled are designed to expose the falsehoods that have been told by the government in attempting to justify new fossil fuel extraction in the midst of a climate emergency . the first is that new oil and gas licences can in any way be compatible with delivering our climate targets , and the second is that propping up oil and gas can possibly be in the interests of workers , rather than genuinely engaging with the need for a just transition and the practicalities of how it is delivered . i will first address my amendments 2 and 3 . taken together , those amendments would insert a new climate test into the bill alongside the government ’s carbon intensity test and the net importer test , which as we know are not so much robust assessments as they are free passes to pollute . the climate test is very simple : it would be met in a given year only if the ipcc finds that current global fossil fuel infrastructure will not emit more greenhouse gas emissions than is compatible with limiting global heating to 1.5 ° . according to the climate minister , indeed , as i mentioned earlier , the un production gap report has warned that governments already plan to produce more than double the amount of fossil fuels in 2030 than would be consistent with limiting heating to 1.5 ° . if we look at what the ipcc itself has said , its sixth assessment report was clear : “ projected co2 emissions from existing fossil fuel infrastructure without additional abatement would exceed the remaining carbon budget for 1.5 ° c ” . closer to home , the climate change committee observed in its latest progress report : “ expansion of fossil fuel production is not in line with net zero . ” regardless of the claims from conservative members that the uk will continue to need some oil and gas up to 2050 , this , and i again use the words of the climate change committee , “ does not in itself justify the development of new north sea fields . ” indeed , last month its interim chair , professor piers forster , was forced to correct the chancellor on this front , reiterating : “ uk oil and gas consumption needs to fall by over 80 % to meet uk targets . ” this is especially critical because , as i reiterated on second reading , the uk does not operate in a vacuum , and issuing more licences in the wake of cop28 , which saw agreement to transition away from fossil fuels , will encourage other governments to go against the spirit of that commitment . this is doubly the case given the uk ’s historical responsibility for the climate crisis , which requires us to show leadership now in modelling the transition away from fossil fuels , not doubling down on the very thing that is driving planetary breakdown . more uk production will not displace extraction elsewhere ; it will fuel it and support a larger global market . however much ministers seek to distort the truth , planetary boundaries can not be appeased by warm words . as the un secretary - general said at the opening of cop28 : “ the 1.5 - degree limit is only possible if we ultimately stop burning all fossil fuels . not reduce . not abate . phaseout ” . i now move on to my second test , the just transition plans test , as set out in amendments 13 and 14 . frankly , i am sick and tired of the government using oil and gas workers as an excuse to issue new licences , pretending that no transition is the same as a just transition , and ignoring the fact that failing to act now actually leaves those workers and communities worse off and in the lurch later on . the choice we are facing is between a managed and fair worker - led transition now , or chaos later on when the reality of the climate crisis bites more fiercely and projects in the north sea are no more than stranded assets , leaving communities once again left behind and hollowed out . offshore energies uk has itself observed in its 2023 workforce insight report that “ the time to act is now : there is a crucial window of opportunity for the workforce between 2024 and 2028 ” . it goes on to say that this is when the uk supply chain capacity can be sustained and that “ the transferability of the offshore energy workforce can be optimised ” . i am very familiar with the report the hon . member has just quoted . does she recognise that what offshore energies uk is referring to — the goldilocks zone , as i have heard it described — is the point at which we need to make maximum benefit of the skills , supply chains and technologies that currently exist in the oil and gas industry , so that we can make the best use of those skills to deliver net zero ? the best way to make use of those skills is by making sure that we put resources behind those workers so that they can make the transition , which so many of them want to do , into renewables . right now , those workers are actually having to pay to make that transition themselves . they have to pay for the training . [ interruption . ] they do . i tabled an amendment to a previous piece of legislation on education and training to try to make it much less onerous for oil and gas workers to shift into , say , the renewables sector . we need to have those plans , and we need the resources behind them to make that a lot easier than it is today . the result and the reality is that the number of jobs in the oil and gas sector has already dropped by more than half over the past decade , despite hundreds of drilling licences being issued . the just transition plans test would be met in a year if the oil and gas authority assessed that all existing seaward area production licence holders have published just transition plans for their workforce that are compatible with limiting global heating to 1.5 ° . amendment 14 specifies that those plans must be agreed through formalised collective agreements with unions , and that they apply to all workers whether they are directly or indirectly employed — or , self employed , which is vital with the heavy casualisation in the oil and gas workforce . indeed , a report in 2020 revealed a high level of concern about job security and working conditions in the oil and gas industry , and that 80 % of surveyed workers would consider moving to a job outside that particular sector . furthermore , given the opportunity to retrain to work elsewhere in the energy sector , more than half would be interested in renewables and offshore wind . workers are ready to lead a just transition , yet a more recent report has revealed that “ companies are increasingly announcing net zero targets — but there is no example in the uk oil and gas sector of worker involvement in decision - making on decarbonisation . ” that must change . this amendment would be a step towards delivering a just transition that would see workers at the centre of transition planning , with a clear and accessible pathway out of high - carbon jobs . rather than propping up jobs that we know are not going to exist in the future , the government should be actively supporting workers to transition out of the oil and gas sector now , while also addressing their very real concerns , such as the cost of retraining , which is often borne by workers themselves , or the inferior employment protections offshore , which can lead to wage under - cutting . there are even some cases of seafarers working in the offshore wind sector being paid below the minimum wage . that is a scandal , and the government should urgently establish a wage floor to apply to all offshore energy workers , regardless of nationality , who are carrying out any work on the uk continental shelf . the failure to deliver a just transition is not an inevitability , but a political choice . if the government are serious about listening to workers and protecting jobs , they should have no problem supporting this amendment , which puts job security at the heart of the transition . i note that “ if the oga assesses that … new licences will support the delivery of the north sea transition deal’s … emission reduction targets ” . yet , as we know , the 50 % reduction by 2030 which is in the nstd proposal , against a 2018 baseline , is far weaker than the 68 % reduction recommended by the climate change committee , which it says is achievable . it is also important to note that this only includes scope 1 and 2 emissions , so it fails to take account of emissions produced when oil and gas is burned . secondly , there is no provision to consult workers as part of this test . therefore , given that it would fail to deliver a worker - led transition and it also exceeds the advice of the ccc , i sadly can not vote for that . before concluding , i offer my support to a number of other amendments . first , i support amendment 12 , on banning flaring and venting , tabled by secondly , i support amendments 19 and 20 , tabled by there has been much debate today about the alternative of lng from qatar , but there has been a failure to take into account whether our being more dependent on lng from qatar would in any way change what qatar does about its own production . it has been recorded that qatar will increase its production by 67 % by 2027 , which means that that energy will be produced and will have certain emissions . at the end of the process , we might have produced something with fewer carbon emissions , but it would be better not to produce them at all . the hon . member makes a characteristically wise and useful point . that figure of 67 % is startling and deeply worrying . thirdly , i support amendments 22 and 24 , tabled by fourthly , i support amendments 23 and 25 , again tabled by the hon . member for brighton , kemptown , requiring the uk to have made arrangements to withdraw from the energy charter treaty before new licences can be awarded . it is totally unacceptable that the government are mandating annual licensing rounds without having withdrawn from a treaty that allows companies to sue for lost profits . the government previously committed to reviewing the uk ’s membership of the ect , including consideration of withdrawal from the treaty if proposed modernisation reforms were not agreed at november ’s energy charter conference . as i understand it , those proposals were not even discussed at the conference , so may i ask the minister , when he sums up , to say what is holding up their withdrawing from that treaty , given that they acknowledge that “ there is now no clear route for modernisation to progress . ” finally , last week it was reported that british gas profits soared tenfold last year following the changes ofgem had made to the price cap . in the same week government figures showed that almost 9 million households — well over a third — spent more than 10 % of their income after housing costs on domestic energy bills , and it was also revealed that not a single new proposal for public onshore wind was made in england last year despite the government ’s policy changes . those three examples are all from just one single week ; this week and next week there will be more , and together they demonstrate the utter failure of this government to make decisions that would benefit people and planet and to unleash our abundant renewables , massively upscale energy efficiency installations and work to get us off expensive and volatile gas altogether . instead , each week we see yet more evidence that this tired and divisive government are prioritising increasingly desperate attempts to save their own skin over measures that would improve all our lives by ensuring that everyone has a warm and comfortable home to live in , communities have been supported to make the most of the green transition and our one precious and infinitely fragile planet is finally restored . i rise to speak to amendment 15 tabled on behalf of the alba party . the choice we face is not between shutting down north sea oil and gas and carrying on regardless but how to make its continued exploitation compatible with the environmental challenges and to acknowledge the role that oil can and will play in a sustainable future for the planet . i do not disagree with the four broad objectives of the uk government proposals , and amendment 15 would strengthen those ambitions on energy independence , safeguarding domestic energy supplies , energy security , reducing higher emission imports , protecting domestic oil and gas industry jobs and working towards our net zero target in a pragmatic , proportionate and realistic way . but i am not convinced that the bill — and certainly government policy as it is currently being delivered — will meet those ambitions . if the provisions are to be truly applied to all parts of the uk as the government state , then scotland , the source of oil and gas and whose waters contain the lion ’s share of carbon storage sites , can not be left out of the action . depleting scotland ’s industrial capacity has increasingly been the direction of travel from this government in recent years and this strategy will not strengthen the union as they claim they wish to do . they should be aware that eroding our industry and jobs will further drive up support for independence . they should also be aware that 74 % of the scottish population support domestic oil and gas exploitation and 54 % of the scottish public support new licences being granted for that purpose . our amendment is without question helpful to all those ambitions , and indeed others , and should be supported by all sides . its proposals are pragmatic , realistic , responsible and , most importantly , fair . the infrastructure in scotland is already in place to meet these objectives . in the north - east we have st fergus and the acorn project , in my kirkcaldy and cowdenbeath constituency we have at mossmoran one of europe ’s four cracker plants alongside an lng plant operated by exxon and shell , and at grangemouth we have one of the uk ’s current oil refineries . i reference the points made by from my discussions with the operators in my constituency , i know their carbon reduction teams have been willing and ready to look at the opportunities since i was elected . exxon has recently made a multi - million - pound investment in mossmorran , securing its future . that is particularly relevant to some earlier comments on amendment 12 with regard to flaring . that was a persistent problem at mossmorran where we had an elevated flare that caused light , noise , vibration and pollution , not to mention the environmental impact of the flaring . that investment has reduced flaring significantly , and all plants should seriously consider that to reduce the impact on the communities and the environment around them . that investment from exxon is well in excess of the modest amount that is required to keep grangemouth going ; it is a multimillion - pound investment and significantly more than what is required to keep the refinery operating at grangemouth . so engagement with industry is essential if we really want to build confidence , as the government claim they want to do , but the uk and the scottish government have moved with glacial speed on carbon capture , and have in particular been hampered by the scottish green party ’s resistance and calls for the wholesale closure of mossmorran . that has limited progress . the capacity for carbon capture and storage in scottish waters is enormous . the uk carbon capture and storage research community estimates that the uk has between 16 and 20 gigatonnes in abandoned hydrocarbon fields and an enormous 19 to 716 gigatonnes - worth of storage capacity in saline aquifers , most of which are in scotland ’s territorial waters . this is enough to store carbon worth 500 years of the uk annual emissions , and of course we expect those emissions to go down year on year . carbon capture and storage is vital to the uk reaching its net - zero ambitions by 2050 , but the carbon must be separated or captured from the flue gas before it can be geologically stored . currently there are three main methods of capture — post - combustion , pre - combustion and oxyfuel combustion . these technologies have great opportunity to advance responsible environmental exploration of north sea oil and gas , but that requires ongoing in - field research and development through universities and industrial partnerships , and the development of world - class engineering expertise . scotland — and i would extend this to the uk — should be in the vanguard of global development , but we are not . my hon . friend over £ 300 billion in today ’s money has flowed from the north sea into the uk treasury since the oil taps were turned on , and over the coming years billions more will be raised . successive uk governments have betrayed north sea workers since 2005 by dragging their feet on carbon capture , and even though we now have the welcome green light for the st fergus acorn project , it is merely an invitation for finance , not a firm commitment to invest . yet the potential success of large - scale carbon capture is greater in the north sea geology than in any other oil province , as equinor has already demonstrated with the sleipner field . carbon capture can be at the heart of an energy revolution in scotland , but political will and investment are required to make it happen , and it is wholly at the mercy of westminster . i am reluctant to intervene , because the hon . gentleman is making some interesting points , many of which i agree with , but i have a burning question . he makes a point about the amount of storage we have around the uk , which is equivalent to more than we have produced out of the north sea , and we must take advantage of that . in his amendment , he refers to licensing conditions for specific fields been tied to having a net zero effect through carbon capture and storage . he has already explained that carbon capture and storage is typically taken from flue gas from the likes of mossmorran in his constituency , or peterhead power station in mine , so how does he make that link between offshore exploration licences and the resultant carbon capture , which will be way down the production line ? the hon . gentleman makes an important point . many of the operators are serious about exploiting the resource not just in scottish or uk waters but in other countries , and other countries can leverage those types of concessions when they grant licences . the uk government can therefore make no serious argument that they can not do that . one of the refrains we heard during the brexit debate was about the reclaiming of national sovereignty . it was one of the reasons for brexit . one of the most limiting factors for job creation in renewables was that contracts for difference and european rules prevented conditionality from being applied to the granting of oil , renewables and other licences . if the uk now has that sovereignty , why not use it to ensure that the communities that are part of the supply line get some form of benefit out of the process ? one of the most obvious benefits is to reduce at source , through a levy on any licence , the carbon footprint of the exploitation of that resource . that would seem a reasonable expectation , and certainly we feel it is essential in granting any future licences . amendment 15 would create a requirement for a specific field commitment of a net zero carbon footprint , as we have just discussed . that would be achieved mainly through connection to the carbon capture network . the prize is to be a world leader in research and development , with an economy built on renewable energy , of which scotland has an absolute abundance . the uk government ’s dither and delay on acorn has gone on for far too long . it is time for scots members on the government benches and their government colleagues to back a secure future for scotland ’s north sea oil and gas sector and to back this amendment . this february is on course to break an unprecedented number of heat records , and the dangers of failing to reach net zero are staring us in the face . this bill flies in the face of our climate change commitments , and it will do nothing to secure energy security and nothing to lower energy bills , and we liberal democrats continue to oppose it . i will mention two amendments that we strongly support , as they are on areas where we liberal democrats have tabled amendments in the past . the bill is silent about methane and needs amending . we therefore strongly support new clause 12 to prevent methane flaring . methane is a potent greenhouse gas with 80 times the warming effect of co2 . it accounts for 30 % of global greenhouse gas emissions . it has often been seen as a quick win . methane stays for much less time in the atmosphere , but it is still there . reducing methane emissions is such an obvious thing to do . the uk has signed a global pledge to cut methane levels by 30 % , and a ban on oil and gas flaring and venting in the north sea would dramatically reduce methane emissions . the international energy agency has said that uk oil and gas operators could reduce methane emissions by more than 70 % by tackling venting , flaring and leaking . that is supported by the environmental audit committee and the government - commissioned independent review of net zero . however , the government ’s track record is not good enough . in his last few days in office , the former energy secretary , we must also mandate monthly leak detection and repair activity . as we have said in the past , it is incomprehensible why the government are on the one hand saying one thing , but on the other not acting . we must do something about methane . it is a complete dereliction of duty if we do not support that new clause . the other amendment i want to speak to new clause 23 , which would insert a new energy charter test . many of my constituents have voiced strong concerns about our continuing to be part of the energy charter treaty . that energy charter test would be met if we withdrew from the treaty . as it stands , remaining part of the treaty leaves the uk vulnerable to compensation claims from investors for the early closure of coal , oil and gas plants . attempts to modernise the ect to protect countries from libel and to drive investment in renewables have failed . denmark , france , germany , poland , slovenia , spain and the netherlands have all announced their intention to withdraw . italy withdrew back in 2016 . why should we not join them ? the new clause provides a vehicle to do that . it is incomprehensible that we have to discuss this bill . it is a bad bill , but the amendments i have just mentioned would make it a little better . i wish to speak primarily to amendments 13 and 14 , but i also support the amendments tabled by this bill will not secure british energy independence or help to meet uk or global climate targets . we know , because the energy secretary told us so herself , that this bill will not lower energy bills , yet here we are debating this bill instead of focusing our minds and time on real solutions that will accelerate the energy transition that is already happening all around us . that energy transition is not only underpinned by a strong scientific consensus to address climate change , but founded in a mission to make energy affordable and to unleash new economic opportunities across britain , particularly in the regions left behind by previous energy transitions . i pay tribute to all the workers in oil and gas , who help to keep britain ’s lights on . their hard work over many years powers our country , and their skills will be essential in making britain a clean energy superpower . that is why we must respect those workers , and why we should be truthful with them . they deserve no less than that , and we in the labour movement remember only too well what happens when communities are faced with the sudden loss of jobs . we remember the closure of the pits and the communities that were left with nothing , because government failed to put in place genuine alternatives and a just transition . i know that british exceptionalism is almost an article of faith or mantra with this government , but being the first country that sells the last drop of oil is not a feasible strategy . that is not just because the world signed up to transition away from fossil fuels at cop 28 , but because the north sea is a declining basin that is nearly empty . new licences between now and 2050 will only provide 103 days of gas . that is just four days of gas every year . saying that we will expand oil and gas licences in a declining basin and pretending that that will make any real difference to jobs in the north sea is nothing short of dishonest . it may provide campaigning material to pretend otherwise , but people ’s livelihoods are more important than political game playing , and we ought to stick to the facts . it is a fact that , for the past 14 years , the government have sustained support for new north sea drilling , and in the past decade they have handed out 400 new drilling licences across five separate licensing rounds . yet it is also a fact that more than 200,000 jobs in and around the wider oil and gas industry have been lost in that same period . no matter where we look , whether it is to the uk climate change committee , the north sea transition deal , ey , transition economics or elsewhere , the projections are the same : there will be further decline in oil and gas employment . in fact , research by the university of aberdeen has found that the decline of oil and gas is already visible in places such as aberdeen and can not be reversed , regardless of new licensing or other attempts to bolster the oil and gas industry . an honest bill would set out the facts clearly and seek to manage that transition , not to ignore it . i feel almost obliged to intervene , if only to agree totally with what the hon . member just said . the aberdeen university study relates specifically to the decline over previous decades . we have lost a lot of workers in the industry , not just because of the decline in production , but because of new technology and the desire to remotely operate offshore platforms in the interest of safety . there has been decline . what he seems to be missing is that we are talking not about a return to the glory days of peak production in the late ’ 90s , but managing that decline with reference to how much energy we need . as was mentioned , we need to promote a goldilocks period in which we make the most of the skills and technologies in that industry for the renewables - based future . the hon . gentleman is absolutely right to say that we must manage the decline , but we must manage the decline in the community ’s livelihood , which is not necessarily the same thing . if we make sure that we have a just transition , and introducing support for retraining and gaining skills , as outlined in the amendments that i am supporting , he will find that his constituents and many others around the country will much better weather that decline and prepare for the sort of future that we want . the bill , unfortunately , does the opposite . it ignores the 30,000 hard - working people directly employed in today ’s oil and gas industry , and the further 100,000 individuals supported by the supply chain . it provides false hope . it sends confusing signals to energy companies , to investors , to the global community , and indeed to unions and the workers they represent . it pretends that nothing needs to change — that business can continue as usual , and that jobs in oil and gas are safe . the government are acting as if maxing out the north sea can happen indefinitely , or at least until they are no longer in office and therefore do not have to pick up the pieces . amendment 14 sets out the need for formalised collective agreements with unions and the workforce to create just transition plans . in spain , we have seen what can be achieved when governments , businesses , workers and unions come together . the just transition agreement that the spanish government have negotiated with affected workers , unions and businesses is popular , economically responsible and environmentally sound . it is a settlement for all involved . that is the approach that ought to be taken in the north sea . the region needs a new settlement , in which : there is an increase in domestic manufacturing ; a new generation of renewables , such as green hydrogen , turbocharges employment in energy - intensive industries ; the technology of carbon capture , usage and storage and the uk ’s unique storage capacity for sequestering carbon can provide a new service that is exportable to the world ; the benefits of the energy system are shared fairly ; jobs are truly safe and secure ; and , above all , those communities who were once the proud purveyors of our fossil fuel energy become our proud sequesterers of the world ’s emissions and the champions of the renewable powerhouse of the future . before i conclude , i want to mention one further spurious reason that the government have put forward to justify the bill : that it stops us from being dependent on oil and gas from dictatorial regimes such as russia . yesterday in the house , my right hon . friend i will not vote for this piece of 20th - century legislation that instructs the house to look backwards and not forwards . i will not vote to make britain colder and poorer . i will not vote to increase flooding . i will not vote to leave communities and workers behind . i will not vote to lock volatile fossil fuels into our already broken energy system . sadly , we must wait for a future parliament — and , i trust , a future government . i look forward to working with members from across the house in pursuit of those goals . i rise to support amendment 15 in the name of my hon . friend we have to transition . it has to be a just transition , which can not just be a glib phrase . it must also be paced , because we can not get there overnight . in my constituency of east lothian , we can see the turbines on the lammermuirs , and we can see them growing in number daily , and the growth in the number of columns , as offshore wind capacity comes . but we require fossil fuels to deliver that renewable capacity . we require diesel for the trucks , and marine diesel for the ships , out setting the columns and turbines . we also require the plastics that go with much of that . so we need to continue using and exploiting oil to get to a renewable future . we have to do so at a pace that is appropriate , but also ensure that our country benefits . that is why subsection ( b ) is so important . there is something perverse in the fact that scotland is energy - rich , yet people face fuel poverty . in my constituency , we are not seeing the benefits in employment that should come from being in a county that is so energy - rich . the county faces the same problem as scotland : it is energy - rich , yet people can only look wistfully at the turbines offshore , while they are unable to pay their bills . we must ensure that we get jobs and work here . the refinery at grangemouth is pivotal to that . i grew up not in east lothian but in west lothian . the grangemouth refinery has been there for a century — since 1924 — not for north sea oil but for its precursor : the shale industry , which was centred in west lothian , from which came bp , paraffin young and others . bp was the centrepiece , along with imperial chemical industries in its various iterations ; it is now petroineos . the refinery initially dealt with the shale industry , but , once north sea oil was discovered , we used it for that oil . the forties pipeline comes ashore from the north sea at cruden bay , and oil is piped down to grangemouth because it was meant to be refined there . grangemouth is also capable of refining oil from elsewhere : a pipeline runs from finnart in argyll through to grangemouth , which allows oil imported from abroad to be refined in scotland . yet we face a situation where unless we support the amendment , grangemouth refinery will likely close . although a spat has been going on between the snp , labour and the tories about the north sea and its oil , little has been said about what is happening at grangemouth . the threat has been growing , and action from the government both here and in scotland has been in inverse proportion to that . i am sure that the hon . gentleman will have heard me reference grangemouth and its future in my contribution . i support his ambition to maintain our hydrocarbon future at grangemouth , as long as it can be sustained economically and environmentally . does he agree that if we are to prevent the jeopardy that workers at grangemouth face from ever re - emerging , we need to make sure that sustainable aviation fuel , biofuels and hydrogen are an integral part of grangemouth ’s output ? we need to ensure that they overlap with hydrocarbons and leave them behind . i have had discussions with the shop stewards and unions , whom the scottish government may wish to follow and not brush off with cursory meetings . we want a biofuel strategy for grangemouth , but that is for some significant time in the future . unless we act now , the refinery could close in 2025 . biofuels will not be refined in grangemouth or anywhere else in 2025 . the shop stewards and the unions wish us to get to biofuels , and grangemouth must be declared a hub for that , but if it is to survive until then , we must ensure that it is a refinery , not simply a terminal , and that we maintain those skills . it is absurd that we will continue to exploit scotland ’s oil , yet its refinery will close . there is something perverse about that . scotland will be the only major oil - producing nation in the world — we are ranked no . 21 along with the uk in the top 25 oil producers — that does not have a refinery capacity . that will put us with large developing countries that produce less oil . we will join a club hosted by the likes of the republic of congo and trinidad and tobago . i am sure that they are lovely countries — i have never visited — but they are not developed nations with an industrial economy . the danger is that we will become a developing nation , in terms of our industrial base . it is not simply about the refinery — the jobs there are important . five hundred could go , and thousands of contractors . it is a cluster . that is why i talked about bp and imperial chemical industries — because ici clustered where bp refined . petroineos and others now do it , and we have to maintain that . first , it is fundamentally wrong that scotland should , as a nation , lose its refinery capacity . secondly , it is absurd that , in this world in which we see rocket attacks on maritime vessels , we risk our energy security . the oil that goes in and out of the clyde or the river forth will not necessarily be subject to attack by houthis , but our energy security is lessened if we do not have and produce our own oil . let us remember that 70 % of scotland ’s filling stations are provided by grangemouth . the entirety of scotland ’s aviation would be threatened , and not just international flights , because in scotland , domestic flights to ireland and remote communities are vital . we would have no control over that and no impact on it . energy security dictates it , and so does the economy . the loss of skills has happened in previous industrial closures , such as the coal mines or ravenscraig . we must remember that it is not just the current generation who lose those jobs . i grew up , many years ago now , not far from grangemouth . when people left school , if they did not go to the pits , a lot of them went to bp and ici . petroineos and its predecessors trained a lot of people who have skills in industries that we require , even if they only worked there for a few months after their apprenticeship . this is a loss of skills not simply for one generation but for future generations . it is a loss to a country that badly requires skilled labour because we have a shortage of it . the young workforce there know that there will not be alternative employment by nipping along the m9 or the m8 . many will have to go south or go abroad . our nation will lose as a result . there are arguments about the extent of the economic devastation . the 4 % put forward by petroineos was too high , but it is certainly approaching 1 % of scottish gdp that would be lost by the refinery becoming a terminal . that is simply unacceptable . there is the economic argument , but there is also the environmental argument . those who oppose the continued use of refining have to bear that in mind . people say , “ the emissions at grangemouth are dreadful . ” having grown up there , i know that there are emissions , and the plant has taken action , but the footprint will be worse . i did some research , and the house of commons library was very supportive . the emissions that come from the refinery at grangemouth would be replaced and superseded gargantuanly by bringing supertankers in and out . oil will go out , coming ashore at grangemouth from the forties pipeline , to be brought back in by another supertanker and sold in scotland . we will face the ignominy of losing the skilled jobs , then having to pay a premium for the oil we import and having significant emissions . people have seen the quotations for the emissions that come from a cruise liner in comparison with a private car — thousands , if not tens of thousands , of private cars . it is exactly the same for a supertanker . the average supertanker uses 20,000 gallons of marine diesel every day . we will increase the number of ships going out and coming in . it is not just in the firth of forth ; we will be importing into finnart in argyll , because that is part of the plan , having lost the refinery capacity . the bonny banks of the clyde will not be so bonny when supertankers are coming in . what about the consideration of the risk ? i asked a parliamentary question about that , and there seems to be no risk . what about the environmental risk of increased traffic on the forth and the clyde ? if there is spillage or an accident with a vessel , we do not want to be another alaska . ships have to come in and out . at the end of the day , if we have a refinery capacity , we should use it and we should maximise it because it guarantees economic security and retains the economic base of an industrial and developed country . it is environmentally more sensible to refine it there with reduced emissions than to spew out a carbon footprint in supertankers going hither and thither out of the forth and the clyde around the uk , and indeed around the whole of northern europe , if not beyond . on that basis , it is about time that we committed into statute that scotland ’s oil will be refined in scotland ’s refinery . our workers and our country should expect no less . it is not a great deal of money that is being sought — we are talking about tens of millions to provide the hydrocracker that will increase profitability threefold , which it is a pleasure to take part in the debate this afternoon , which has been wide - ranging , well informed and genuinely interesting . i thank members from across the committee for their participation and for playing an important role in scrutinising this important piece of legislation . before i move on to specific amendments i will , if you allow me , dame rosie , briefly outline the importance of this bill . the uk leads the world on tackling climate change , and is the first major economy to halve emissions . the bill will protect jobs , tax receipts and sovereign capability , so that we can continue that world leadership . as one of the world ’s most decarbonised major economies , the uk remains dependent on oil and gas and will continue to be , albeit in reducing amounts , according to the climate change committee . even when we are at net zero in 2050 , we will require oil and gas . however , we are a net importer and , as has been discussed , uk production is falling fast . the ambition of will the minister give way ? i will make a little more progress . annual licensing will improve our energy security and that of our neighbours . it will support 200,000 jobs and safeguard billions in tax revenue and , as my hon . friend is the minister going to give way ? i promise to come to the hon . gentleman before i finish . turning to the amendments selected today , i first thank my right hon . friend i fear that the amendment would risk replacing voluntary momentum with a slower , compliance - based , more resistant approach from industry . however , i will continue to engage with my right hon . friend as the bill moves to the other place , with a view to delivering the end of flaring and venting by 2030 at the latest , which is an ambition he and i share , as do the government . with that , if i am very grateful to the minister for giving way , and no — i would not lose my mojo on this . we all know that there is 110 % more oil and gas already in the world than we can use if we are to remain within the 1.5 ° c threshold . does the minister think the climate really cares where that oil and gas are used ? his argument about imports implies that he does believe that the atmosphere cares . the damage will be done ; the only way we can reduce its impact is by ensuring that the proposed additional exploration licences are not achieved . i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . he has taken a long and deep interest in this issue , for which i pay him respect . it is the burning of oil and gas that is the primary issue . he mentions 110%—we probably have 200 % , 300 % or 400 % . there are countries setting out to massively increase their production . that is all driven by demand . if we — as a species , as a globe — are to get to net zero , we will have to cap wells all over the world . we will have to leave it in the ground . the most important thing is to ensure that the demand curve is going in the right direction . despite all the issues , challenges and difficulties of maintaining our role as the leading major economy in cutting emissions , the uk ’s biggest challenge in dealing with climate change is not domestic , despite the difficulty of that ; it is to get others to join us on a net zero pathway . the idea of producing our own emissions to ever - lower standards and replacing them with higher - emission products from abroad is for the birds . it makes no sense . will the minister give way ? i am going to press on . [ interruption . ] i do not mean to be rude , but i think i am unlikely , given his previous performance , to be terribly afeared of hearing from the hon . member for angus . i turn to a series of amendments that seek to place conditions on when oil and gas licensing rounds are run . amendment 15 relates to carbon capture , usage and storage , and the grangemouth refinery . the oil and gas sector provides a significant portion of the investment that the uk needs to go into wind , ccus and hydrogen , and i fear that the amendment would drive that investment elsewhere . it would also tie uk production of oil and natural gas to the refining activities of one refinery — grangemouth — which i am sure members across the house would agree is neither practical nor desirable . amendments 22 and 24 would result in an inconsistent approach between oil and gas licensing and our ambition for domestic energy efficiency . the government already have a clear aim for as many homes as possible to reach energy performance certificate band c by 2035 where cost - effective , affordable and practical . that is the minimum standard required to replace fossil fuel boilers with low - carbon heating such as heat pumps . on amendments 23 and 25 , we are already reviewing our energy charter treaty membership . as far as we are concerned , there is no longer a clear route for modernisation . we will update the house in due course . new clause 2 was tabled by my hon . friend amendments 2 , 3 , 13 and 18 seek to add an additional climate test to the bill . the uk produces far less oil and gas than we need , and even with new licences , production is expected to decline faster than the average that is required globally to align with the un ’s 1.5 ° c pathways . all that this test would do is stop licensing and increase dependence on imported products like lng , which has production emissions that are four times higher than those of domestically produced gas . the right hon . member for doncaster north knows this — he must — so what , other than ideology and a desire to please his just stop oil backers , could lead him to table an amendment that could raise emissions , lose british jobs and hammer our economy ? truly , it is a mystery . my right hon . friend is making a powerful speech . is the reality not that reducing producer emissions in this country only to increase reliance on imported consumer emissions is entirely counterproductive for the environment and very damaging in terms of public support for the direction of travel ? my right hon . friend is absolutely right . that is the absurdity : ending licences will simply increase our imports . it will not change our consumption . if imports such as liquefied natural gas have higher emissions embedded in them , they are counter to our net zero aims . i now turn to amendments 8 and 9 , which together add a new energy and job security test to the bill . the test , with its complex set of criteria , would damage investor confidence and cause confusion for industry , risking our energy security , jobs , and the skills and investment needed for the green transition we all want to see . it would make our system of administration of this area as opaque as the answers the hon . member for angus gave to straightforward questions earlier . amendments 10 , 11 , 13 and 14 introduce additional just transition tests to the bill . we are absolutely clear on the importance of achieving a net zero basin by 2050 and are on track to deliver that . we need the skills , expertise and resources of the oil and gas industry to support our transition to cleaner technologies , maintaining oil and gas jobs so that they are not lost before renewables and other clean technologies grow to take up those skills . amendments 19 and 20 would alter the proposed carbon intensity test to include an assessment of all imported natural gas . providing the buffer source of supply last winter , liquefied natural gas is critical to meeting supply and demand fluctuations . despite the expected fall in gas demand and continued north sea production in both the uk and norway , we are going to become more reliant on lng imports , which are , as i have said , four times more polluting than producing our own gas . if we produce less domestically , we import more lng . it is very simple and why a comparison with lng is the right one to make . amendment 21 would require the secretary of state to report on how the carbon intensity test would be affected by including gases other than carbon dioxide . international initiatives are under way to expand the scope of emissions monitoring data , so if and when those efforts bear fruit , we can use the power in section 4 of the petroleum act 1998 to amend the test and bring in other greenhouse gases , as colleagues across the committee have mentioned . until then , it will not assist parliament or the public to produce a report about something that is not realistically possible due to a lack of international emissions monitoring data for gases beyond co2 . it is just worth saying that , overwhelmingly , the greenhouse gas footprint of our north sea production is co2 and not those other gases . the bill provides certainty for industry to keep investing in ever cleaner , though always declining , uk oil and gas production as we transition to reach net zero . failing to support the bill could forfeit tens of billions in tax revenues , which the opposition have no plan to replace any more than they had any idea how to fund their “ here today , gone tomorrow , maybe it is back again ” apparently vital £ 28 billion plan which is no more . it would betray the 200,000 british workers who depend on a healthy oil and gas sector to make a living , and it would mean more reliance on imported lng with four times higher production emissions than domestically produced gas . i am grateful to hon . members for the interest they have taken in the bill and the valuable scrutiny they have brought to it . i hope they are reassured by what i have outlined , and that they feel able to withdraw their amendments . on that basis , i call on all members to support the bill . i have listened intently to the minister and i welcome his willingness to work together on the issue of flaring and venting . what i did not hear from him was the clarity that i wanted on whether government would look to introducing an amendment similar to amendment 12 in the other place . perhaps that is something we can discuss before the bill returns to this house . indicated assent . i am delighted to see the minister nodding . i would just point out that even if the government do not support a similar amendment in the other place , i am fairly confident that a similar amendment will be moved and i expect supported in the other place . this place will then have the opportunity to opine on that particular amendment , so i will not divide the committee on this occasion . i beg to ask leave to withdraw the amendment . amendment , by leave , withdrawn . amendment proposed : 10 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the just transition test ( see section 4zd)”.—(dave doogan . ) this paving amendment , together with amendment 11 , introduces a new test to be applied by the oga before inviting applications for seaward new production licences . the committee divided : ayes 44 , noes 285 . question accordingly negatived . amendment proposed : 17 , page 1 , line 6 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) the climate change test ( see section 4zd)”.—(dr whitehead . ) question put , that the amendment be made . the committee divided : ayes 226 , noes 287 . question accordingly negatived . clause 1 ordered to stand part of the bill . clause 2 ordered to stand part of the bill . the deputy speaker resumed the chair . bill reported , without amendment . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . it is my great pleasure to thank everyone who has supported the progress of the bill . i recognise the excellent contributions of members from across the house who have engaged closely with this important piece of legislation . i thank those on the government benches who spoke for their engagement with the bill . in particular , i thank my right hon . friend i also welcome the robust scrutiny from the offshore petroleum licensing bill will give industry the certainty that it needs to continue to invest in the north sea , to strengthen our energy security and to support the transition to net zero . the uk is leading the world on our journey to net zero emissions . we have the fastest reduction in emissions of any major economy — of any member of the g20 on the planet . in fact , we recently celebrated not only fulfilling and even exceeding the targets of the sixth carbon budget coming out of the landmark climate change act 2008 , but officially halving our emissions since 1990 ; we are the first major economy on the planet to do so . even when we have reached net zero in 2050 , oil and gas will still play an important part in meeting our energy needs , as data from the climate change committee shows . as the most decarbonised major economy in the world , 75 % of our primary energy comes from oil and gas . those who work in the north sea producing oil and gas — there are 200,000 jobs supported by the industry — should not be ashamed of what they do . it is the demand end — our cars , our homes and our factories — that we need to change . we need to meet that challenge ; like don quixote , we will be tilting at windmills if we , a net importer , try to make our production the problem , rather than demand . [ interruption . ] that was not what i was asking . the minister says that we need to look at demand ; where is the national insulation programme , so that we can insulate all our homes and reduce demand in that way ? there is n’t one . the hon . lady may not have been present for the previous stage of this bill , but as she has been present for other debates in this house , i can not claim that she is an absentee member , so it is extraordinary that she is unaware of the amazing transformation in insulation in this country since 2010 . is she not aware that , in 2010 , just 14 % of homes were decently insulated ? today , the figure is well over 50 % . we are spending £ 6.5 billion in this parliament , and will commit another £ 6 billion between 2025 and 2028 , precisely to deliver the transformation that she calls for . on top of that , we have the eco schemes , and obligations on industry . that is how we have taken ourselves from the parlous , shameful situation left behind by the labour party in 2010 to one where , although there is still much more to do , 50 % of homes are decently insulated . the minister was very kind to come to my constituency in northern ireland to look at the potential schemes for sea turbines and the contract for difference arrangements . at the time , he indicated that , whenever the assembly was up and running , the contract for difference scheme would be the responsibility of the northern ireland assembly . he was very keen and eager to assist the assembly . is it his intention to contact the northern ireland assembly to ensure that the cfd scheme can be promoted ? his input into that will make a big difference . i thank the hon . gentleman , who is a consistent champion not only for his constituents but for the clean transition . i look forward to meeting and working with the new minister for the economy , who i believe has the energy portfolio in northern ireland . the bill will give industry the certainty that it needs to continue investing in the north sea , to strengthen our energy security , and to support the transition to net zero . the government ’s position is clear : we should , as far as possible , seek to meet continued uk demand for oil and gas from the uk ’s own sources . that means continuing to use the north sea — a uk success story that has contributed billions of pounds in tax revenue and supports an industry of around 200,000 workers . the oil and gas industry , with its strong supply chains , expertise and skills , is vital to driving forward the net zero transition and the investment in clean technologies that we need to meet our net zero targets . we all want the energy transition delivered in an orderly way that does not risk thousands of those jobs . artificially reducing our production from the north sea or banning new licensing would do just that and jeopardise the energy transition , our progress towards net zero and our climate leadership , not to mention the billions of pounds in lost tax revenue . the bill is about ensuring a smooth and orderly transition . new licences awarded under the bill will manage the decline in domestic oil and gas production , rather than increase production above current levels , and they will give industry certainty by sending a strong signal of support for continued investment in the sector — investment that is necessary both for our energy security and to help deliver the energy transition . i commend the bill to the house . it is customary on third reading to start with thanks , and i would like to thank two groups of people . first , i thank the civil servants who held their noses to write this pile of rubbish for the house ’s consideration . secondly , i thank the government for introducing the bill , because as a number of people will know , it has led directly to the election of a new labour member of parliament for kingswood , following the resignation of the former government climate tsar , who wrote the net zero report and had this to say about the bill : “ this bill would in effect allow more frequent new oil and gas licences and the increased production of new fossil fuels in the north sea … i can also no longer condone nor continue to support a government that is committed to a course of action that i know is wrong and will cause future harm . ” he then resigned , and the rest is history . thank you , minister , for increasing labour ’s representation in this chamber by one seat . although we hope to have a lot more seats in the very near future , that is progress . the minister has form on this . he was the minister in the adjournment debate on fracking some while ago — it was not an adjournment debate — get it right ! sorry ; the opposition day debate on fracking , which effectively brought down the truss government as a result of the various prevarications at the time . i thank the minister for that . what i do not thank the minister for is the completely misleading and almost erroneous way in which he has characterised the future under the bill . on licences , the bill will do things that are already done , and it will not make any change . it will not suddenly increase confidence across the sector , because the sector knows that the bill is just a piece of performative theatre ; and it will do nothing — contrary to what the minister and others have claimed — to cut energy bills , tackle the cost of living or improve our energy security . at a time when people across this country have suffered two years of crushing energy costs and an inflationary crisis driven in large part by our significant exposure to gas prices — which , as we all know by now , are set internationally — the bill offers no solutions . the secretary of state herself admitted that it would not cut bills , and lord browne , the former chief executive officer of british petroleum , said that it was “ not going to not make any difference ” to energy security . the board of the north sea transition authority , which is responsible for giving out licences , unanimously agreed that the bill is unnecessary and would challenge its independence . however , even though the bill will achieve none of its stated aims , it is far from consequence - free . offshore energies uk has said that if labour ’s policy was implemented , it could cost this country 42,000 jobs and £ 26 billion of economic value . perhaps the shadow minister will respond to that consequence . we are talking about what the government are doing through this policy — that is what we are concentrating on today . i hope we will have another much wider debate about the effect that a comprehensive transition policy for the whole north sea field would have , with associated arrangements for the transition of investment , energy security and worker and job security , in the context of future jobs and future energy security . many people in the industry have already said that that is exactly what we need to secure the future of the north sea . it is a declining basin ; its output will not change greatly as a result of the measures that the government are proposing . on the other hand , unless urgent action is taken to secure a holistic transition for the north sea , it certainly will not have the investment and the future that so many of us want to see . we need to put that overall consideration alongside some people ’s shorter - term concerns about what will happen to the oil and gas industry right this minute . this has been an extremely crucial issue in the north - east of scotland , particularly this week . does the shadow minister think it is a small , short - term problem that 42,000 highly skilled workers in that area could lose their jobs under labour ’s plans ? they will not . i have tried to make it very clear , against what is , frankly , misinformed scaremongering by government members , that under labour ’s plans the north sea will , of course , continue to produce efficiently and effectively over a very long period of time . we know that the north sea is a very mature field and is in decline , and all authorities have said that the government ’s proposals would make no difference to that overall pattern . we are looking at how to make sure that the north sea continues to produce well and efficiently the oil and gas we will need for the future in declining amounts , while at the same time transforming that economy to produce new forms of energy for the future and maintaining security of production . that will be the big task for the future labour government — i am pleased that i can not let that go unchallenged . this letter from the aberdeen and grampian chamber of commerce to the leader of the opposition — the leader of the labour party in the uk — says that “ if north sea production is to cease prematurely — a certain outcome of this ” labour “ policy — then our entire energy transition is undermined . ” this has massive consequences , and i have to say that the reaction of the shadow minister is quite telling . the hon . member rather gives himself away by the first sentence he read out : “ if north sea production is to cease ” . north sea production will not cease — it is “ a certain outcome of this policy ” . north sea production will not cease over a long period of time , and labour is committed to making sure that that production continues at the appropriate level for the maturity of the north sea basin . that is something that all sensible people understand to be the case , although it is unfortunate that certain conservative members pretend it is not the case for their own political purposes . will the hon . gentleman give way ? i will make some progress . the bill , as i have said , will achieve none of its stated aims , but it is far from consequence - free . the consequence is that it makes a mockery of our country ’s commitments to take serious and responsible action on climate change . that is exactly the point the former right hon . member for kingswood , chris skidmore , made in his resignation letter to the prime minister . that point should not be a partisan point . indeed , it has not been a partisan point , because a number of members on all sides of the house , including a number of conservative members , can see the direction in which this short - sighted prime minister and government are going , and want no part of it . some members are trying to make changes to the bill . as i have said , one has resigned , and a number are working hard to turn around the direction of this government in resiling from our country ’s climate change commitments — commitments they so recently signed up to , at the recent cop — on moving away from oil and gas . regrettably , the prime minister and the government , including this minister , are not having any part of that . i am particularly disappointed that the minister is not having any part of it , because of his long and honourable commitment to these matters on the international stage over such a long time . “ reinforce the unfortunate perception of the uk ’s rowing back from climate action”.—[official report , the reality is that the cost of living crisis we are in is to a large extent caused by our country ’s deep exposure to the volatile international price of gas . the international monetary fund has said that this exposure meant the uk was harder hit by the crisis than any other western nation . just today , the energy and climate intelligence unit has found that this country has spent an additional — in addition to normal spending—£75 billion on gas since the energy crisis began . four extra days of gas supply by 2050 can not possibly make the slightest bit of difference to this price . as i have highlighted , the secretary of state herself conceded that point on the very day the bill was announced . the supposed arguments on energy security and jobs are similarly flimsy . the reality is that , as we have begun to discuss this afternoon , the north sea is an extremely mature and declining basin . gas production will fall by 95 % by 2050 , even with new licences . the notion that this is a firm basis on which to build our energy security or protect jobs is clearly absurd . as i have outlined , we need a fair and balanced transition for north sea oil and gas workers that recognises the essential role they will continue to play in operating existing fields , which no one disputes will remain a vital part of our energy mix , and puts them at the heart of our clean energy future . to safeguard the jobs , skills and livelihoods of the communities that have been the backbone of our energy system for decades , we need a government with a proper industrial strategy to maximise the low - carbon economic potential of the north sea . labour will create a national wealth fund to invest in low - carbon industries , it will launch a british jobs bonus to ensure that the supply chain benefits of renewable investment finally come to our shores , and it will create a new publicly owned energy company , gb energy , headquartered in scotland , to invest in home - grown clean energy and give us real energy independence . that is the answer that the country needs and that the communities who have served as the backbone of our energy systems for decades need . political theatre , whether in westminster or holyrood , helps no one and does a disservice to the people looking to us for answers to the very real challenges we all face . the final argument that the government have made in favour of the bill is that it is somehow , as we have begun to unwrap , a climate - positive piece of legislation . this argument rests on a series of partial and deliberately gameable tests , as we discussed in committee , with skewed conditions that look only at a narrow band of emissions , ignoring methane for example ; that look only at production emissions , ignoring the impact of actually burning the fuels we are extracting ; and that look only at liquefied natural gas , ignoring the fact that the majority of our imports are pipeline - delivered . it includes no test whatsoever for oil , which makes up the majority of remaining reserves . that is why i have sympathy for the civil servants who wrote the bill , who had to squeeze various things into it such as ignoring gas that was coming into pipeline , only having tests against liquefied gas and ignoring the methane emissions in the various versions of the arrangements in place for measuring emissions from production . i was very disappointed that the minister gave no reaction at all this afternoon to that particular point on methane . the data simply does not exist , as i think i set out . it does not exist and we can not make a comparison if the data does not exist . we are world - leading in having that data ; others do not have it . on the methane comparison , we are already below the internationally set goal ; we have very low methane emissions in the north sea . on the comparison with lng — which is the buffer fuel , which is why it is the true comparator , rather than norwegian gas , which the hon . gentleman is failing to admit — methane is emitted as it is shipped , so the methane story would make it even worse for lng versus domestically produced fuel . perhaps the hon . gentleman would put that into his argument . i would not put it into my argument , but i am a little puzzled under those circumstances that the north sea transition authority recently published a factsheet on precisely this point about the relative emissions of various contributors to gas and oil into the uk , which looked at the contribution from various countries and at the various emissions levels of those contributions , and set out how those contributions arise . i do not know whether the minister is quite up to date with what his own north sea transition authority is doing , but perhaps he ought to have a little look at that because he would see that actually the data is there . it does exist , and we can draw the sort of conclusions i drew this afternoon from it , and indeed from a number of other international data sources that are coming in . the argument that the marginal unit of gas must always be lng is simply not correct , because the bill makes no provision whatsoever for the shape of uk gas demand at the point at which the gas is extracted and used . it effectively assumes that our national demand for gas will remain unchanged in perpetuity . when we are in a crisis caused by our reliance on fossil fuels and committed to a net zero transition , that assumption is patently wrong . i hesitate to intervene again , but to suggest that this bill has the assumption that our gas demand remains the same is absolute nonsense . of course it is coming right down . we are on a net zero pathway . we are leading the world in that and our demand is falling fast ; it is just that our production will fall even faster . the hon . gentleman should not mislead the house , and i am sure he would not want to do so . i think i have already indicated that gas production is predicted to fall by 95 % by 2050 . the addition of one or two licences will not make any difference at all to that precipitous fall in practice , as it will be four days more of gas over the period . that is the basis for why we say that the government ’s commitment to net zero transition while producing large amounts of additional gas and oil is patently wrong . we should be sprinting towards clean energy . we should be investing in renewables , rather than banning them , as the conservatives have done with onshore wind . we should be saving the country billions by moving to decarbonise power systems by 2030 and making far greater efforts to insulate homes and reduce gas demand there . on climate change , on energy security , on jobs and on bills , this bill has nothing to offer but false promises that frankly insult the public ’s intelligence . to support this bill , we would need to believe that we can double down on the causes of the cost of living crisis and still solve it ; that we can somehow defy geology in the north sea and change the fundamental nature of international energy markets ; and that we can ignore all the science and credible experts on climate change and still meet our commitments , including our commitment to transition away from fossil fuels made by the minister at cop28 a few short months ago . it is clearly nonsense , but it is emblematic of a government who have run out of ideas and run out of road — a government who can see the many real challenges our country faces , but have no answer to them beyond confected political drama . in their misguided pursuit of a political dividing line , they have shrunk our country on the international stage , made us hypocrites in the eyes of the world and opened the door in this country to a new divisive politics on climate change that i sincerely believe the ministers sitting opposite me today are not comfortable with , do not want as their legacy and will come to regret profoundly . this bill will deliver nothing , but it threatens much . for that reason , i urge the house to vote against it . it has been interesting following the process of this bill . i spoke on second reading , and i sat through most of the committee today , and i am pleased to speak on third reading to support the proposals brought forward by this uk conservative government — the only party supporting our vital oil and gas industry across the united kingdom , and particularly in the north of scotland . my constituents in moray , many of whom work in the oil and gas industry , will be shocked and annoyed by what we have heard today from those on the snp benches and by the deeply disappointing remarks we have just heard from i do not know whether the hon . gentleman is a regular reader of the press and journal , but its front page made clear what people in the north - east of scotland think about labour ’s proposals . the scottish sun said that people in scotland could wave goodbye to tens of thousands of jobs . that is not the papers or the opposition just saying that ; it is papers reporting what experts in the field are saying . we know that the labour party changes its policies quickly , and i can only hope this is another of those , because its actions are having a deeply damaging effect . were these policies ever implemented , they would have a huge impact on the oil and gas sector and the people who work in it and rely on that oil and gas production . tens of thousands of jobs and livelihoods are at risk . as we often want to articulate our own views in this chamber , i think it is only right that we repeat some of the concerns raised by the industry . offshore energies uk ’s chief executive dave whitehouse is someone who must be listened to on this subject . i met him recently on a visit to aberdeen . he said that labour ’s proposals “ would deliver a hammer blow to the energy we need today and to the homegrown transition ” . he also said : “ these are not faceless numbers but decent , hardworking people working across the uk to provide the energy we will need today and in the future . ” that is an expert view on the labour proposals . aberdeen chamber of commerce has described labour ’s plans as a “ betrayal ” . chris wheaton , an oil and gas analyst , said : “ the uncertainty created by threatening new windfall taxes is as bad as the tax itself . ” perhaps most powerfully of all , last week , more than 800 individuals , firms and trade groups wrote to the leader of the opposition to express their deep concerns about what is being spoken about by the labour party . sadly , in scotland , we can not get a cigarette paper between the labour party and the snp . it is almost as if they are in a race to decimate our oil and gas industry and want to outmanoeuvre each other . both support a windfall tax . both oppose the rosebank field . both are speaking about dangerous proposals—[interruption . ] liberal democrat members think that is funny . i am sorry , but i do not think it is funny that tens of thousands of jobs across scotland are under threat . i take that issue extremely seriously . speaking about the snp , i tried to get this out on second reading and in committee . i am delighted that i do not know about you , mr deputy speaker , but i have just about heard enough from the hon . member today . for the fourth time , government members ’ association between the number of licences issued and the number of oil and gas jobs protected is specious at best . we have been accused by them — including , i think , the hon . member — of wanting to put the oil and gas industry in scotland to the sword . there is no such plan . the leader of the snp and scotland ’s first minister humza yousaf was in aberdeen just yesterday talking about how scottish oil and gas workers must never be left behind . i am disappointed in order . i remind members that this is a third reading and that we should not be reopening arguments that were heard in committee or previous stages . i respect that ruling , mr deputy speaker , but i do not think it is reopening anything , because we have not got any further . i have tried at second reading , in committee , and now at third reading . why is it so difficult for snp members who represent communities in the north - east of scotland to say what is actually in their own draft energy strategy ? it says there is a “ presumption ” against new “ exploration ” for oil and gas “ in the north sea ” . the fact that the hon . member for angus can not simply stand up and give his own position tells us exactly how people in the north - east of scotland feel . the snp has breathtaking hypocrisy on this issue . it wants to run down the oil and gas sector . it is no friend of the oil and gas sector . of course , the snp asked the green party into government — that tells us everything we need to know . was the hon . member as confused as i was by the answer given by that is just one example of the mixed and confused messaging from the snp which , sadly , we hear far too much in this chamber . we have heard it across the north - east this week and it has dominated much of our proceedings . will the hon . member give way ? i will , because this may be our final chance to hear if the hon . gentleman believes in the snp ’s draft energy strategy , which included a presumption against licences for new oil and gas exploration . as much as i am enjoying the hon . member ’s crocodile tears about protecting jobs in scotland , i wonder if he could give confidence to those oil and gas workers in scotland by highlighting an example from recent history when the tories have protected anyone ’s job anywhere ? it is only this uk conservative government and the scottish conservatives at holyrood who are standing up for an industry that supports more than 200,000 people across the united kingdom and 95,000 people in scotland . we have heard that 42,000 jobs are at risk under the labour proposals , which are almost identical to those of the snp . rose — i will briefly give way , and then i will bring my remarks to a close . how does the hon . gentleman propose to get to net zero by 2050 and a temperature rise of no more than 1.5c ? our current projections exceed all that . all i hear is that we have to increase oil and gas production in the north sea , but that is the wrong path to net zero . how will we limit temperature rises to 1.5c and ensure that we do not carry on the current trajectory of well over 2c ? the government do not have an answer for that . the hon . lady has misinterpreted everything that i have heard during the debate . no one is saying that there will be increased production ; we are looking to protect what is happening at the moment , and jobs . as my hon . friend that is why i want us to maximise what we can do in the north sea , supporting tens of thousands of jobs in the north - east and right across scotland and the united kingdom , and work towards that just transition , which offshore energies uk and everyone else is fully behind . that is why i support this bill and the efforts of my right hon . friend the minister , who has worked constructively across the house . i have had very useful meetings with him , the secretary of state and others . the bill also sends a clear message that there is one party on the side of workers in the north - east and those in the oil and gas sector across the united kingdom . that is the conservative party — here in government at uk level , and the scottish conservatives at holyrood and across scotland . more and more people are starting to see that the labour party and the snp are turning their backs on these workers , and only the scottish conservatives and this uk government are supporting them . the bill is completely lacking in merit . it seeks to solve a problem that does not exist . the north sea transition authority can issue licences , and it has been doing so . this is a potemkin argument ; a specious debate about the issuance or otherwise of licences . when this bill passes , which it will given the arithmetic in this house , it will change not one jot the ability to issue licences or otherwise . what it seeks to do is put on a pedestal and create conflict in what was previously broad consensus about the need for a just transition to combat a climate emergency . in the tone and tenor of the debate today , government members in particular have shown a desire to weaponise that . we just heard from government members have spoken at length about the need to ensure that we do not develop a gap between that which we demand and that which we can supply — it has already passed ; the uk can no longer sustain its own demand . we have to import oil and gas from elsewhere . but that is a myopic obsession with the supply side . there is not nearly enough being done by the government after 14 years to mitigate the demand side . supply is a function of demand ; the be supply requirements are such as a result of that which is being demanded . if there had been a truly ambitious programme at any stage over the past 14 years to insulate houses , get people into electric vehicles and introduce further decarbonisation of our economies and lifestyles , we would not have the demand that we have now . the potential gap between that which can supplied domestically and that which has to be imported would inevitably be less in a zero - sum game . however , we do not have any of that . i will not go over an issue that i am not going to get an answer to . however , the hon . gentleman ’s own party has been in government in scotland for 17 years now , and the scottish government have repeatedly missed their own climate change targets , largely because they have not done what he is accusing the uk government of not doing . how does he reflect on his own party and government in scotland who have not done enough to insulate homes , get more people into electric vehicles and put in the charging points that we need across the country ? not for the first time , the hon . gentleman has stood on a political landmine if he thinks he is going to hold me to account on the availability of charge points . what he may not know — although , knowing him , i suspect he probably does — is that someone wanting to find anywhere on these islands with more vehicle charge points than scotland would need to come to london or the south - east of england . scotland has many more available charge points for electric vehicles — rubbish ! well , we can sort this out later . scotland has the third highest availability of electric vehicle chargers of all geographical areas in the united kingdom . i think the scottish government ’s record is exemplary — having , as we do , one hand tied behind our back due to being a member of this non - union , with the freedom of movement and zero agency that comes from being a non - sovereign state . any other normal country could invest into whatever it wants , and could do so using the normal levers that an independent country would have . scotland , of course , can not do that because it must wait for its cheque every year from westminster . if i pay tribute to the snp ’s amendment proposed an elegant solution to invest the additional receipts from oil and gas extraction in the north sea basin directly into the renewable transition , protecting people from higher bills , insulating their homes and getting them out of their petrol and diesel cars and into electric cars . as we saw in the prime minister ’s rolling back on heat pumps and electric vehicles — a further weaponisation of the climate emergency — that is not on the agenda of this fag end tory government . they are trying to scrabble around looking for votes , but that does not work . they have achieved tremendous damage with that approach and judging by recent by - election results they have gained zero political capital . on the mess that is evident before us—[interruption.]—while i get heckled by the hon . member for moray , i and my snp colleagues urge members to decline the bill a third reading . rose — order . proceedings must finish at 40 minutes past 5 . four people are standing . please be considerate to other members , so that everybody can get in . it is hard to know what more can be said about this farcical and unnecessary bill . it feels as if we are running out of adjectives . taking part in this debate , listening to the ridiculous heckles from the government front bench , almost legitimises this desperate and dangerous attempt to create yet another culture war out of something as serious as the climate emergency , but i put on record my deep disappointment that the government are playing such dangerous games . ever since the climate change act 2008 was first introduced , there has more or less been a consensus of a kind , with a recognition on both sides of the house that the climate crisis was real and that we needed to act fast to address it . of course , there were differences on some of the detail , but not on that substantial issue . now , however , it feels as if we have a government who are putting all that at risk and that the legislation is all of a piece with ministers rolling back pledges on home insulation , the boiler replacement scheme , electric vehicles and so on — the ludicrous list we had from the prime minister about all sorts of things he was going to scrap that were never government policy in the first place . i will add one further argument to those we have heard over the past few hours : projects such as rosebank will not enhance our security , not just because the oil is mainly exported , but because public opposition to such projects and their unlawfulness mean that developments are subject to lengthy legal battles . that is a very real risk . would it therefore not be better to accelerate the roll - out of cleaner energy , which is much more popular with the public , and not give , in this case , rosebank ’s owner equinor nearly £ 3 billion in tax breaks ? lawfulness is particularly topical today , with a law case going on right now about whether the government are meeting their climate objectives and whether the reports they have produced contain enough policy detail to persuade the population that we are on track to meet our climate targets . that also demonstrates , frankly , that the boosterism we have heard from the minister is entirely misplaced . complacency does not address the climate crisis or the fact that while the uk once had a leadership position on climate , it has one no longer . when i listen to some of the voices on the conservative benches , i sometimes feel as if this place is on another planet from the one that is overheating . it is undeniable that we are living through what many are calling the sixth mass extinction . we are living through a risk of earth ’s systems collapse . scientists are running out of words to describe the seriousness and to try to wake up policymakers to exactly what is at stake . we have just heard that there is a risk of a total loss of late summer sea ice in the arctic . that is now baked in and could happen as early as the 2030s . that , in turn , is likely to trigger even more extreme weather events in the northern hemisphere , through the weakening of the jet stream . in the antarctic , melting of the sea ice has accelerated dramatically , which could lead to cascading collapses of the fresh water ice shelves , with catastrophic results for rises in global sea levels . new research in the amazon has found what scientists call precursor signals of an approaching critical transition . deforestation and climate breakdown could now cut off circulating rainfall in the basin , triggering a rapid flip from rainforest to savannah . this is what we are talking about here . future generations will look back to this time — they may even look back , who knows , to this debate — and wonder what on earth we were thinking by giving a green light to more oil and gas licences . when we ask ourselves why that is happening , we might also reflect on the role of the fossil fuel lobbyists . a few weeks ago , when i held an adjournment debate on the subject of the fossil fuel lobbying that goes on in this place , i noted that offshore energies uk and its members , including bp and shell , had “ met uk government ministers more than 210 times in the year following russia ’s invasion of ukraine — that is nearly once every working day . ”—[official report , the combined profits of shell and bp alone have reached £ 75 billion , and i would suggest that that is not unrelated to the direction of the government ’s discussion today . let me end by quoting from a letter from more than 700 uk scientists who wrote to the prime minister last year urging him to halt the licensing of new oil and gas . they included chris rapley , a former head of the science museum and a professor at university college london , and mark maslin , a world - famous professor of earth system science at ucl , and they all warned against any new development of oil and gas . they wrote : “ if the uk allows any new development of oil and gas fields , it will severely undermine … claims of leadership by contributing to further oversupply of fossil fuels , and making it more difficult for the world to limit warming to 1.5 ° c . therefore , the uk should commit to preventing any new oil and gas field development , and the government should state this commitment clearly … there are those who might claim that stopping new developments of oil and gas fields would raise concerns about the affordability and security of future energy supplies , but there is now overwhelming evidence that the uk is far better served by a rapid transition to domestic clean energy sources , particularly renewables , and decarbonisation of our economy . doubling down on fossil fuels will not lower energy bills or enhance our energy security … the ipcc report stated : ‘ the choices and actions implemented in this decade ’ ” — now , at a time when we are all in decision - making positions — “ will have impacts now and for thousands of years ’ . ” the moment for political leadership is here and now , and i beg ministers to rise to the occasion . there are about 18 minutes left . i call wera hobhouse . it is a pleasure to follow i have heard repeatedly , throughout the debate , “ we are responding to demand . ” of course there will be demand for as long as we provide unlimited supply , and of course the oil and gas industry itself will want to drill for every last drop of oil for as long as it can , but it is for a responsible government to make a responsible decision , and to look the dangers that confront us in the face . the tobacco industry says that there is demand for smoking materials , and the government have understood their responsibility to stop that demand because smoking is dangerous , but they fail to see or understand the dangers of climate change . we need a government who will guide the economy into the net zero future , because we need to secure a prosperous future , in the long term , for all people , rather than concentrating on a short - term election issue that may divide members after such a long period of consensus on the need to reach net zero . while the government claim that new licences will improve energy security , the reality is very different . between now and 2050 , new licences are expected to provide an average of only four days of gas per annum . all that the bill does is send a symbolic signal . it does not even meet the requirement that the government have set themselves — securing energy for the future of this country . that is why i think the bill is so dangerous . as i said on second reading , it was introduced for political reasons , not because the government are genuinely intent on any outcome except electoral gain . that is why we should oppose the bill and make it very clear to our citizens that it does nothing for energy security , nothing to get us to net zero , and nothing to curb energy bills . all members of the house in their right mind should oppose this bill . i call sammy wilson . please be cognisant of the fact that the debate will finish at 5.14 pm , and mr foord would like to get in , too . may i first say that we fully support the bill and the objectives that have been set ? as has been said time and again during the debate , we will require oil and gas for decades — and it may as well be british oil and gas , because that means jobs in britain , tax revenue , and reducing our imports . if we are to continue to use oil , there are very good reasons why we should give licences for its production . i find some of the arguments made today very strange . passionate speeches have been made against this bill on the basis that — let me paraphrase another argument used against the bill is that it is a confected and contrived piece of legislation , designed simply to be part of the culture wars and to drive a wedge . indeed , given the stance that has been adopted by the labour party , my great worry in all this is that although the government are trying to inject some confidence into the debate , it does not give any long - term confidence , because we will have an election this year and investors will not know whether the arguments we have heard today will lead to licences not being granted in the future . my second concern , which has been alluded to by we give the bill our support tonight . we think it is sensible , and that it gives confidence . it also shows that the government recognise the reality : people will use oil and gas for many decades into the future , and we have to ensure that we benefit from the fact that demand is there . most people in this country accept that we need energy security , that we must move away from fossil fuels to more sustainable energy sources , and that we must seek to reduce our carbon emissions to meet the challenges posed by climate change . they see the effects of climate change every day . recently in my corner of devon , the communities of feniton and cullompton showed me what it was like to experience flash flooding . it has caused terrible damage to constituents ’ properties and destroyed some of their most treasured possessions . flooding will only get worse and more frequent as the uk continues to suffer the effects of climate change . we in the uk have shown leadership in this area . we should be setting an example to the rest of the world on the need to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions , but also crucially on the economic benefits that the uk can enjoy as a result . the government claim that by mandating the north sea transition authority to run regular bids for new oil extraction licences , they will protect the uk ’s energy security , but that simply does not add up , because 80 % of the oil is exported , so there will be no material difference to people ’s energy bills , and we will still be reliant on imported liquefied natural gas . we saw that in the second invasion of ukraine in 2022 ; it caused huge spikes in oil and gas prices and left consumers facing spiralling energy bills . they would not have been nearly so badly affected by that if we had continued to invest in onshore wind in the way we were doing in 2015 , or if we had continued to insulate buildings in the way we were in the coalition years . it is not uk - produced oil that would have mitigated those price rises , but uk - based renewable energy and demand avoidance , encouraged by a more progressive government than this one . for example , octopus energy notes that £ 5 billion could have been saved by consumers if onshore wind had continued to be developed at 2015 rates , but the conservatives were left to govern alone , and that prospect vanished . the uk energy research centre said of this bill : “ a fixation on new licensing … is a distraction . it offers comfort in the possibility of conserving oil and gas production … rather than grasping the challenge of a rapid transition . ” to put it bluntly , this is the approach of a government who are too scared to embrace the future and make the fundamental changes that we need to build a better future for our children . many on the conservative benches have highlighted the challenges of phasing out oil and gas as we transition to renewable energy , but there are not only challenges . there are also opportunities to support new home - grown , clean energy that will power our homes and create a swathe of well paid jobs . we can not cling to the past because we are too scared of the future . there is an analogy here from over a century ago , when great britain first embraced oil . winston churchill was first lord of the admiralty in a liberal government . he took office in 1911 , a key point in the anglo - german naval race . there was a big decision on his desk when he took on the role . how should great britain power its ships ? until that point , coal had been the royal navy ’s dominant source of fuel . it was produced at home in britain , and the saying “ carrying coals to newcastle ” reminds us that there was an abundance of coal in britain , but that did not make churchill determined to exploit the abundant reserves of that fuel , which was powering the world ’s largest navy of the day . churchill signed an order for the royal navy to be powered by the innovative energy source of the 20th century , which happened to be oil . oil was more efficient and allowed ships to travel faster , further , with less fuel . it also allowed for the innovative design of new ships . by this government ’s logic , churchill should have put that cutting - edge energy source on the back burner and stuck to coal . the arguments made in favour of coal then were similar to those being deployed in favour of the bill today . churchill believed in looking to the future and seizing the opportunities that arose , so he took the fateful decision that all new ships in the surface fleet would switch to the more innovative , more energy - efficient fuel source . as a result , the royal navy continued to dominate the seas and hampered germany ’s international trade and , later , its war effort . today , china is working on zero - emission shipping . the california - china climate institute at berkeley is looking at 21st - century innovations that will power the leading economies of this century . if china tunes into bbc parliament and sees us in our 19th - century surroundings , it would think it quaint that we are debating which 20th - century energy source we should cling to . churchill ’s decision in 1911 put britain at the forefront of innovation and design , allowing britain and british talent to reshape the character of the 20th century . do conservative members disagree with mr churchill ? are they daunted by the prospect of seizing the opportunity presented by new sources of energy , including renewable energy , to power the uk in the 21st century ? why are they seeking to take these short - term , short - sighted decisions that fly in the face of our climate commitments ? this conservative government already offer subsidies to the oil industries , and they are already indifferent to the price of renewable energy being tied to the price of gas . it is time for a rethink . it is time to focus on improving the national grid , boosting home - grown green energy and investing in the technologies of tomorrow . question put , that the bill be now read the third time . the house divided : ayes 286 , noes 221 . question accordingly agreed to . bill read the third time and passed . with the leave of the house , i will put motions 3 to 5 together . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft mesothelioma lump sum payments ( conditions and amounts ) ( amendment ) regulations 2024 , which were laid before this house on that the draft pneumoconiosis etc . ( workers ’ compensation ) ( specified diseases and prescribed occupations ) ( amendment ) regulations 2024 , which were laid before this house on that the draft pneumoconiosis etc . ( workers ’ compensation ) ( payment of claims ) ( amendment ) regulations 2024 , which were laid before this house on question agreed to . ordered , that rob butler be discharged from the justice committee.—(sir bill wiggin on behalf of the committee of selection . motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(aaron bell . ) tonight , i will speak about the benefits of walking and cycling . let me quote proverbs 22:6 : “ train up a child in the way he should go ; even when he is old he will not depart from it . ” although perhaps slightly sexist , that is inscribed on the wall of captain shaw ’s church of england primary school in the home village of bootle where i live in the lake district . it is where my four daughters all went to school , where i was a school governor , where i welcomed my right hon . friend there are many terrifying things that we all do in life . some might say that speaking from these benches or from the dispatch box fits into that category , but let me tell you , mr deputy speaker , that when your school has just 14 children and you have responsibility for the entirety of years 5 and 6 , taking them out on the a595 really is quite terrifying . of course the children were brilliant . they learned all about the brakes , honed their skills and mastered the basics of road safety awareness , and , verified by an independent inspector , every child passed the test at the end of the session . that provided me with a heightened appreciation of the 2,231 bikeability instructors in this country . conversely , a more joyous occasion that i can just about recall was finding my own freedom . a late developer , i was about six years old when i started to ride my raleigh comanche , affixed with stabilisers , which i now know are more of an impediment . balance bikes are so much better for little ones to learn to ride , as i observed on a ministerial visit to the netherlands with active travel england , where i saw so many children as young as 18 months — as young as the minister ’s little boy , kitto — learning to ride their balance bikes in a huge municipal hall . the slightly older children would practise on a street scene , getting to grips with the highway code . the more advanced children would put me to shame with their bmx skills , complete with their mastery of narrow bridges , speedy corners , agility and fast reactions . all the while , they gained confidence and skills that last a lifetime and support healthy lifestyles . back to me , though . aged six , i would enthusiastically and patiently wait for jonti , the boy next door , to return from college or possibly work — he was about 17 years old . i would spot him coming home , pop round , knock on the door and ask , “ mrs parr , is jonti available to come and help me learn to ride my bike ? ” that poor man ; i am so sorry — but i was delighted to feel the freedom of riding my own bike . i am sure that many others in this house have felt that freedom , too . however , only one in four children have a bike nowadays . later in my speech , i will address that , and encourage the minister to support me . teaching my girls to ride their bikes was a huge privilege . it was an equally amazing feeling to see them on their way on two wheels . the fact that one in four children are lucky enough to have a bike of course means that three in four do not have access to one . that has not prevented bikeability from supporting schools by adopting the loan of fleet bikes — indeed , all eligible local authorities that applied were successful in getting fleet bikes — but if children and their parents do not have bikes at home , that is clearly a barrier not just to motivating them to undertake bikeability courses , but to their ability to ride bikes as a normal , everyday thing to do . thanks to the brilliant rich and sue martin at cyclewise , 83.9 % of schools in cumbria received a level 1 and level 2 course , or at least a level 2 course — well exceeding the active travel england target of 80 % . however , not all local authorities are doing so well . i would welcome it if the minister took a lead on that , perhaps by writing to the poorly performing local authorities to encourage them to embrace the benefits of more active travel . i thank my hon . friend for introducing this adjournment debate . she was a fabulous minister who very much promoted walking and cycling , and i am sure that the current minister will do equally as well . like my hon . friend , i love my bicycle — i am pleased that antisocial behaviour orders did not exist when i was a kid , because what i did on my bmx would certainly have got me quite a few — and i continue to cycle . does she agree that one challenge is that local authorities do not take a consistent approach to encouraging cycling , whether through investment in infrastructure , planning and design , or supporting schemes such as bikeability ? my hon . friend makes an incredibly valid point . we need to encourage all local authorities to embrace the bikeability training that is available to them , as she will know from the incredible work that she does to encourage us all . she provided huge motivation for my joining the early - morning running club , and for so many people in this house to get a bit fitter , and i am really grateful for that . talking of brilliant people , it is brilliant that we have appointed chris boardman mbe as the national commissioner for walking and cycling — a tremendous force for good , not just for sport but , even more importantly , for active travel as an everyday way of life . i hope he will not mind me quoting him . he has said that gear change could be one of the greatest health interventions that a government have ever made . as the minister in the department for transport responsible for the future of transport , including walking and cycling , i was especially proud to create active travel england and appoint danny williams as its chief executive . that organisation has gone from strength to strength under the current minister ’s steering : headquartered in york , it is realising wheely great projects right across the country ! one of my most memorable visits as a minister was to eaglesfield paddle church of england primary school in my constituency . i observed the children , who were in years 5 and 6 , undertaking their bikeability training with cyclewise . after that training , those children were so enthusiastic — they had really enjoyed the sessions — so i asked them , “ who rides their bike to school ? ” unfortunately , not a single child put their hand up , so i asked them another question , “ who would like to ride their bike to school ? ” everybody put their hand up . the problem was a rather nasty junction very close to their school . i encourage the minister to prioritise schemes that will make routes from home to school safer , or perhaps ask local authorities to prioritise those schemes , because it is crucial that children are able to form healthy habits at an early age . does my hon . friend agree that local authorities often fall into the trap of doing the easy bits — painting white lines on the road — but not tackling those nasty junctions , which are the real disincentive that prevents people , particularly young people , from taking up more cycle opportunities ? my right hon . friend is absolutely right . we need to tackle those junctions and make those improvements . it is not always about segregated or designated routes ; often it is , but certainly in our rural areas where there is less traffic , tackling those quite dangerous junctions makes parents more likely to encourage their children to cycle to school and form those really important healthy habits at an early age . i am loth to intervene on my hon . friend ’s speech , because it is quite fascinating — she has talked about the path that each of us takes into cycling and through life . in my own constituency , we have been very fortunate that the government have invested £ 18.6 million of levelling - up moneys in the môr i’r mynydd — coastal to mountains — active travel route . crucially , one of the benefits of that route will be enabling pedestrians , cyclists and wheelers to avoid the nasty black cat roundabout when getting from glan conwy to conwy . that means that school pupils and students in glan conwy will be able to get to aberconwy school without having to navigate that roundabout , which is exactly what my hon . friend is talking about . my question , though , is about rurality . in rural areas , those busy a roads are very difficult to get past or get around , so does my hon . friend agree that along with bikeability and the ambassadors , the provision of designated active travel routes is a key part of getting more people on to their bikes ? yes again . there is a lot of agreement in the house tonight , and enabling those routes to schools and tackling those junctions is primarily what active travel england will be looking at . having routes that comply with local transport note 1/20 is really important , but where that is not possible , we should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good ; we should enable as many children as is physically possible to get on to their bikes or walk to school , to form early healthy habits so that they grow into healthier adults . i am grateful to the hon . member for giving way . i am particularly pleased that she has focused on young people in her debate , which is very impressive , but of course , some of the infrastructure for active travel is also needed by older people . on of course that is needed for all ages ; i welcome the hon . member ’s intervention . my point is that when resources are stretched and priorities need to be made , we should prioritise those early habits , because those children will grow into adults . it is an absolutely crying shame that in this country an average of about 25 limbs are amputated every day as a result of diabetes . i think it is a national disgrace that we have the third highest population living with obesity in europe . while we are very good in cumbria at teaching bikeability training , we are , sadly , woefully inadequate when it comes to children getting out and riding their bikes , with , unsurprisingly , the health inequalities that follow . those statistics are national statistics , but they are even worse in cumbria . the conversation at the moment is very much about cycling , but i think we need to remember walking as well . in trimdon , one of my villages , we have a road — we were talking about a roads , but this is a b road — that goes straight through the village at pace . the village is one side and the play area is the other side , and a little stepping stone to get across has been proposed many times . if we could get such things put in place , it would build the habit of walking , which builds the habit of enjoyment in moving around . is that part of the agenda my hon . friend is trying to get to ? yes , my hon . friend is absolutely right . i have been focusing on cycling so far , but i will come on to walking . i will entertain the house with my walking adventure , all the way from saint bees in my constituency right over to robin hood ’s bay , which is some 195 miles . the infrastructure for walking and cycling is vitally important . we are having a debate about active travel , which is a very important debate to have , but i think an even more pressing issue — and i ask the minister to have discussions about this with his counterparts in the department for environment , food and rural affairs — is the growing mountain of ultra - processed foods we now consume in this country . it is perhaps 60 % to 80 % of our diet , which drives profit away from the local farmer , because this stuff is not really food ; it is feedstuff fed into mechanised processes and fiddled with for huge commercial gain , at great cost to our life quality and our life chances . so rather than the local farmer benefiting from food produced sustainably , big pharma profits from the pills and potions prescribed to patch the problem . thank god for social prescribing , which i think is a fantastic intervention by the government . i am also delighted to work with people such as andrew denton , jim burt and william bird , who are just a few of the geniuses i have had the pleasure of working with recently in trying to create a more naturally healthy britain . as part of the routes 2 roots campaign , the ask of the department for transport includes changing the funding model so that 5 % of the road budget is dedicated to supporting active travel ; creating safer walking and cycling routes , including better lighting and surfacing , and repairing potholes , which are a menace to all road users ; and adopting “ 20 ’s plenty”—not everywhere , but outside schools where it really matters . this would have multiple benefits , such as improving air quality around schools , which are usually in the centre of communities , and making available more of the road space and pavement space that is so important for walking . importantly , it will develop in young children healthy and active habits that will last them a lifetime . about a quarter of children in this country are living with obesity when they start school at about four or five . however , the real tragedy is that 35%—over a third — of children are leaving primary school living with obesity . those figures are alarming , but in cumbria , again unfortunately , it is even worse . the vast majority of those children will grow into adults who suffer further health issues as a result of their formative years . i might be asking this transport minister to overstep his mark , but it would be helpful if he perhaps wrote to ofsted , because i think it would be incredibly powerful if , during ofsted visits , the inspectors asked schools how many of the children are walking or cycling to school . i think that would encourage schools to work with parents to develop safer routes , with things such as side - road zebra crossings and other ways in which we can improve the routes from home to school . that would mean that children get to school and are more able to concentrate , and perhaps that they get in the daily mile in one day from getting to and leaving school . it would also ensure they have formed the early habits of living more healthily that will last them a lifetime . i am listening to my hon . friend ’s contribution with great interest because i spend most of my time scrolling through social media looking at cumbria and trail running or walking and cycling there , and i find it astonishing that many people who live there do not access her constituency , which i have the desire to visit every day , as she knows . why is there a disconnect between those of us who do not live in cumbria and who want to go there to participate in these activities and the local community itself ? my hon . friend raises a very good point about rurality , which was also raised by my hon . friend i want us to crack the issue of the far too cheap and easily available ultra - processed foods and to stick with the really great “ gear change ” programme — in case the minister did not get that the first time . i want us to ensure that active travel england is resourced and supported as it has been into the future , and bikeability has the ability to teach all children those essential skills , and i want us to value the work of cycling uk , sustrans , british cycling and the conservative environment network . there are so many brilliant organisations who are doing so much good to roll out better networks , better education and more encouragement . there are huge benefits to the economy as well from having a healthier population , reduced air pollution and less congestion . that means fewer sick days , more work days and longer life expectancy . it means more start - ups , more scale - ups and more exports by brilliant british businesses making fantastic state - of - the - art bikes like ribble , which is the make of my own brilliant gravel bike , and the companies that are making technical clothing , equipment , cargo bikes and trikes of all kinds . there are so many brilliant british brands . i had the joy today of speaking with the founder of frog bikes . its products are a great example of tackling a problem , ridding young children of the need for stabilisers and enabling them to harness balance bikes instead . it is a great company , which is growing by the year . the commitment in the environment act 2021 that everyone should live within 15 minutes of a blue or green space , is a fantastic one . i wholeheartedly welcome the formation of national trails within the national landscapes portfolio in the department for environment , food and rural affairs . i know full well that the minister works very collaboratively and i ask him to meet with ministers from other departments . on this subject , we can achieve a sum greater than its parts by working together . clearly there is a key role for the department for transport , the department for environment , food and rural affairs and the department of health and social care . if the minister were willing to convene his counterparts , that might be incredibly effective , not least because he is an incredibly effective minister . i understand that there is already an inter - ministerial group focused on physical activity , which is good , but a focus on how we can achieve a naturally healthy britain across transport , the environment , homes and communities , levelling up , health and the prevention agenda , education and lifelong learning of healthier habits , the sports strategy and supporting a visitor economy to embrace the great outdoors would be truly transformational . on tourism , in my constituency we host part of the sustrans sea - to - sea cycle route , which goes from whitehaven to sunderland . we also have wainwright ’s coast - to - coast , which is soon to be a national trail , from st bees to robin hood ’s bay . we conquered the latter last year — all 194 miles — carrying everything on our backs across the lake district , the yorkshire dales and the north york moors , spending money as we went . later this year , again with my husband keith — an avid lifelong cyclist — we will be cycling the atlantic coast between porto and lisbon along part of eurovelo 1 . that is just a flavour of the tourism benefits of walking and cycling . our target in government is for half of all short journeys in towns and cities to be walked or cycled by 2030 , and for 55 % of five to 10 - year - olds to walk to school by 2025 . in urban areas , we are nearly there , but much improvement is needed in rural areas , where only 17 % of school journeys are walked and hardly any are cycled . while a distance of a mile or two may be too long to walk in the modern world , it is perfectly possible to warm up on a bike . may i also give a huge shout - out to the technology advancements of e - cycles as well , because hills are no problem — she says , living in cumbria , home of the highest mountain in england — with an electric bike ? one can carry cargo or the kids . when i was in the netherlands on a ministerial visit , i stood in awe in the car park in utrecht , i think , which was one of the cities we visited . there was an aisle of bikes adorned with carriers of all kinds for children — on the front , on the back , on the crossbar , with a tow hook and with a trailer . there were all manner of ways of carrying one ’s children . i was so impressed , and we could learn so much from the netherlands . if he has not been already , i recommend that the minister undertake a visit . danny williams came with me when i went , and i recommend the minister take him once again , because it was an inspirational visit . it is part of why i am speaking with such enthusiasm today . let us look at why more children are not cycling or , perhaps , why more parents are not encouraging or allowing their children to cycle to school . sadly , in cumbria we have rates above the national average of children being killed or seriously injured , so parents ’ reluctance is justified . while great safety improvements have been made , they have been predominately benefiting the car occupant , rather than the more vulnerable pedestrian or cyclist . we also have the fact that most road injuries are happening during school commute times . then we have the real barriers of affordability . that is not just the bike and helmet , but having somewhere to conveniently , safely and securely store the bike . having access to the right bike is even more expensive . storage at home , en route , such as at train stations , and at destinations , such as schools , colleges , work , essential services , shops and recreational places , is required . while bikes remain a cheaper form of transport than private cars , bikes in the uk are increasingly state of the art and are often highly prized . they are costly feats of engineering , so security is a key factor . it is brilliant to witness the resurgence of manufacturers making bikes , from the frogs i mentioned earlier , which are made in wales , to my own great choice of gravel bike , the ribble , from lancashire . there are many more , along with equivalent clothing from restrap in yorkshire to endura in scotland . it is fantastic that we have the sustrans national network , but sustrans found that 42 % of households with children have no children ’s bikes . sustrans route 72 is a mostly traffic - free route from seascale to whitehaven and on to workington . the brilliant route 727 , which is more fondly known as the viking way , is a project that i was involved with when i worked as a regeneration officer at copeland borough council . thanks to the then cumbria county council , sellafield and sustrans , the villages of seascale and gosforth are now connected by a superb , segregated , designated route , which is well used by people walking and cycling alike , and by children and adults . sustrans reports that just 52 % of adults feel that their areas are safe for cycling . even worse , only 29 % feel that their areas are safe for children to ride their bikes . that is why seven out of 10 adults say they will never cycle , with safety cited as the main reason . our gear change strategy , which as i said is one of the greatest health interventions , really is the way forward . we should stick with the programme . i am pleased that we have strengthened the highway code and thank everybody involved with promoting that . i also thank cycling uk for its great work . as it said to me , in cumbria , only 12 % of young people meet the world health organisation recommended amount of daily exercise , but just 14 % of parents feel confident to teach their child to cycle on the road , so the work of active travel england is vital , creating routes that are local transport note - compliant wherever possible and creating an atmosphere and environment that is more conducive to walking and cycling . we have come so far in creating active travel england , but there are real barriers in affordability and , of course , storage , and local authorities need to prioritise those healthy habits . i think that i have pretty much summed up the opportunities if we get this right , the barriers currently faced , the progress we are already making , and the benefits of working together . my overriding ask of the minister is that he joins with other government departments — the department of health , which has the most to gain ; the department for education , which can make possible the formation of early habits ; and the department for environment , food and rural affairs , which can think about how we pay farmers for access to their land — in recognising that the sports strategy should embrace the great outdoors , as well as the visitor economy benefits from walking and cycling . i very much look forward to his response . what an honour and a privilege it is to respond to my hon . friend i thank my hon . friend for visiting northumberland when she came to see the benefits of the tynedale superhighway . madam deputy speaker , i must be careful not to talk for the next hour and a half about the amazing cycling and walking projects that exist in northumberland and to take my hon . friend as madam deputy speaker can not say this herself , it is only right to note that ridelondon now goes through her constituency , which is an excellent part of the country to cycle in . my hon . friend has done a very good radio 2 link to what i was going to talk about . as the minister for active travel , i am delighted to say that i have done ridelondon . on several occasions i have done the haydon hundred in my constituency . the most interesting of all is the dunwich dynamo , which is undoubtedly the most iconic cycling race of all time . it is an attempt by more than 5,000 people to leave a hackney pub on the shortest night of the year and cycle , totally unsupported , from hackney all the way to dunwich in suffolk—120 miles — through the night . the instructions are literally an envelope . without a shadow of a doubt , it is the most fearsome and amazing cycle trip to be part of . ridelondon is a massive boost to the local economy , and extols various local virtues . my hon . friend the member for copeland asked me to go to holland on a cycle trip with danny williams , the amazing chief executive , and i endorse her assessment of him . i must confess that about 20 years ago , long before i came to this place , i did the trip from zandvoort on the coast to amsterdam on a bike , and i have cycled extensively in holland . we in this house should be excited because although we might say , “ our infrastructure is not quite there . we want to do more cycling and walking , and we want things to be better . we want active travel to be more impressive and for the opportunities to be better , ” we only have to look back at the situation in holland only 30 or 40 years ago to see the degree to which its infrastructure has transformed the nation and how its populus gets about . that is totally tangible . we are some years behind it in that change , but we should strive to emulate that objective . my hon . friend spoke glowingly about the coast - to - coast , the quality of which i endorse , having done it . i trump her 190 miles with the 268 miles of the pennine way , the first part of which i was delighted to do with my good friend the minister talked about lcwips at the last adjournment debate of 2023 on transport infrastructure in cullompton . i remember him saying that the lcwips for cullompton would be consulted on , which is true — that consultation concluded earlier this month . can his department work with devon county council to ensure that the walking and cycling infrastructure around cullompton extends all the way to tiverton , willand and uffculme ? i will await the information put forward by the local authority , but it is unquestionably the case that we are trying to take forward the lcwips and to ensure the best usage , enhancement and improvement of local infrastructure . i await what the local authority has proposed . on the point my hon . friend the member for copeland made about schools , surely we can all get behind the 20 mph zone around them . it is unquestionable that where local authorities can prioritise lcwips around schools , they should do so . if the message has not gone out , i am happy to make that point . i have been asked to do an awful lot of writing to an awful lot of people , and let me address those points . first and foremost , all cycling and walking has a massive benefit and impact on health . my hon . friend identified that if we want a healthier britain , more people need to be cycling and walking . the evidence is overwhelming that regular physical activity of any shape or form reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes by up to 40 % and cardiovascular disease by up to 35 % . my hon . friend is right that there are sadly far too many obese children in our schools and far too many people who are not taking advantage of the great outdoors , much to the consternation of my hon . friend the member for chatham and aylesford . we have to change that . we have to try to change those perceptions and get this country out of the torpor that it descended into slightly during covid . the minister is making an excellent point on the value of the great outdoors and being active . i know that this is not his department ’s responsibility , but does he agree that approximately 80 % of that ill health is related to diet , and that ultra - processed foods have a part to play in the state of the nation ’s health ? as a government minister , i am not allowed to endorse a particular book or approach ; that would be genuinely wrong . a bit like the bbc , we think that all organisations , institutions and authors have merit and everything like that . however , having been given as a present “ ultra - processed people ” , chris van tulleken ’s book on the science behind food that is not food , i have to say that i utterly endorse the point my hon . friend is making . we have a genuine problem in this country : we are allowing the production of food that is neither supporting our farmers nor necessarily good for our population . this is not my department ’s responsibility , so i could not possibly comment on the efficacy of evidence or on changes that should be made . however , there is a growing body of evidence that says that government really have to look at what we are doing about ultra - processed food and how to put out better messaging . that is difficult , and pretending it is not is naive . however , i utterly endorse the message that we need to eat more healthily if at all possible , and taking out of the game some of those ultra - processed foods and their impact seems to be a no - brainer to me . more particularly , it can not be a good thing for this country that we are allowing our population to eat food that will inevitably give them diabetes and allow them to put on weight without , in most cases , people realising that that is what is going to happen . that just can not be right , in my humble opinion , and we should do something about it . there are a few things that i can do about it . my hon . friend the member for copeland challenged me on a number of points . the first relates to an inter - ministerial group that i am part of . as anyone who has been a minister will know , there are some inter - ministerial groups that are really important and worthy , and some that are interesting , to say the very least . the national physical activity taskforce , which is run by the sport minister , my right hon . friend as for bringing together all the departments to address national physical activity , i think it is entirely the right thing to do . it is wider than just saying , “ we want people to do sport . we want them to get physically active . ” of course , that is right , and individual members of parliament can make a real difference on this . there is no doubt about that . they can meet with sport england — i recently met both the chief executive and my local representatives — and drive forward the sporting infrastructure that we all want to see ; they can get local representatives in their constituency . i should put on record my thanks to the amazing rob aubrook — whom my hon . friend met when , as the minister with responsibility for cycling , she came to northumberland — who has driven forward more cycling infrastructure and other local infrastructure projects , just as my hon . friend made sure the infrastructure was improved in her local area when she was just a humble campaigner from bootle . that surely is what we should all aspire to . there is more we can do , and many colleagues put forward proposals . i agree with much of what my right hon . friend this is a good opportunity to put on record my thanks to my hon . friend the member for chatham and aylesford for her service in this house , because sadly she has decided to step down . she was an outstanding sports minister . we troll each other in a very polite way on the extent of our saturday morning cycling or racing activity . both of us have suffered cancer and have made a remarkable recovery . she is a good example of never letting the past define you , and always looking onwards and forwards . we will miss her desperately . she raised a key point , which is : what more can we get local authorities to do ? bluntly , a lot more . the first point is surely this . every mp will see a new housing development come into existence . said housing development will always have a section 106 agreement on local infrastructure and support . too often , however , only after its development will there be a thought about cycling infrastructure , accessibility , accessible transport , buses and so on . i am genuinely trying to change that , because what we presently have is unacceptable . it is just not good government to allow a situation in which local authorities do not grasp that there is so much more they could do . we are trying to retrofit old infrastructure . my hon . friend the member for copeland talked about york . i was lucky enough to go to active travel and meet danny and all the amazing team . everywhere i go with active travel i always get on a bike , so we cycled around the medieval and roman town of york , with all the difficulties there are there in ensuring cycling infrastructure on the very narrow streets that harry potter was delighted to use . but for modern housing , we surely must get it right . when it comes to modern housing , section 106 should provide for all the necessary cycling infrastructure . the best part of 10,000 people are moving to barrow for the aukus project — my hon . friend secondly , we have set up an amazing scheme called bikeability . it is fundamentally a success story , as my hon . friend the member for copeland rightly outlined , because it encourages more and more children to cycle on an ongoing basis , get training and so on . the honest truth is that some local authorities are very good at that — cumbria is a great example — and some local authorities are shockers . i am strongly urged by officials not to name and shame them , but i will certainly write to every single local authority and extol those that are doing well , and ask why that is not 100 % of them when there is this amazing , free government scheme to encourage our population to get healthier , get fitter , get outdoors and learn how brilliant it is to be on a bicycle . i give my hon . friend an undertaking that i will definitely do that . my hon . friend rightly raised the issue of schools . it is true that i am not an education minister — some would say that that is a very good thing — but i will write to ofsted , as she invited me to , to establish the extent to which we can drive forward an assessment . i take comfort from the daily mile , a project that originated in scotland and has percolated southwards . it is a massive success story : every single headteacher at the schools that do the daily mile will genuinely say to those who visit them that it transforms the way that the kids are educated . it transforms their attention , their fitness and their engagement , and does them a world of good in a host of social and other ways . a natural extension of what schools are doing would be for there to be an assessment of , or at the very least inquiry into , how schools are trying to improve rates of walking and cycling , both at school and in the journey to school . we have a walk to school week , which is part of a programme organised by the department for education , but the blunt truth is that it is not very successful . far too few kids walk to school , and we must try to do more about that . my hon . friend invited me to comment on social prescribing . on her watch , that started with a £ 13.9 million budget , which has been invested in 11 local authority pilots over three years . one of them is of course in cumbria ; the others range from suffolk to bath and from gateshead to plymouth . the pilots are expected to engage tens of thousands of people in walking , wheeling and cycling , and we will assess their impact in 2025 , at the end of the three - year project . however , i can tell her that if i have anything whatsoever to do with it , we will continue that project , which has my hearty endorsement and support . i come to our approach to rural areas , and i speak as the member representing the largest constituency in the country . rory stewart and i used to have a dispute over whose was larger . i told him that size did not matter , but that hexham was larger . the long and short of it is that rurality in general is very difficult , and trying to establish a rural cycling infrastructure is very difficult . off - road is often better : i can extol , without a shadow of a doubt , the sandstone way , which runs from hexham to berwick in northumberland , and the work that we are doing in kielder forest . however , it is hard to secure taxpayer funding for more rural routes because the treasury operates on a bang - for - your - buck , green book basis and so tries to get more ongoing funds for urban beneficiaries . let me end by saying a bit more about the key issue of funding . ten or 15 years ago , £ 30 million , £ 25 million or less was spent on cycling and walking . i look at the budgets of up to £ 300 million over the last four or five years , and the ongoing £ 200 million investment in active travel , and i see that we have come a long way . do we have further to go ? of course we do , but the direction of travel — and in a debate about cycling and walking , the direction of travel is surely important — is utterly clear . we are investing more than any previous government . our projection is that over the period up to 2025 , £ 3 billion will be invested across government in active travel , including investment from the city region sustainable transport settlements and the levelling - up fund . there will also be further funding opportunities through network north in future years . it is important to note that whatever the original active travel budget may have been , the hs2 money — whether through the city region sustainable transport settlements or the levelling - up fund additions — and any further local transport funding that may or may not result in the next few months can be used to support walking and , in particular , cycling schemes , and we would encourage mayors , where appropriate , to pursue those opportunities . in september last year , we announced £ 60 million of revenue funding for supporting active travel to school , including through walk to school , the big bike revival , modeshift stars and , obviously , bikeability . i have had a bikeability meeting with emily cherry , the brilliant chief executive of bikeability trust , who is very well known to my hon . friend . i endorse the support for that initiative , and we think that more can be done , but 500,000 places with £ 21 million of support is not to be sneered at . we have reached 51 % of year 6 children in 60 % of primary schools . i would love to do more , and we are trying to make it happen . may i congratulate the department , bikeability and the wonderful emily cherry on recognising the difference that it can make to children with special educational needs and disabilities to learn to ride a bike or trike that is right for them ? huge improvements have been made in creating a more accessible bikeability . my hon . friend is right : bikeability is transformational . we need to do it bigger and better , and more widely , but it also requires a change in the great british public . first and foremost , it requires mums and dads , headteachers and local authorities to say , “ we want to get behind this . ” i think we can do that , and the direction of travel is good . she is right to praise emily cherry , danny williams and all the active travel team . i met the vast majority of them when i went to york . they are doing god ’s work in transforming hundreds of projects up and down the country . i have not mentioned mr boardman — probably because i owe him a beer , which is always a worry — but it is great to have the opportunity to work with one ’s heroes . i grew up watching chris boardman in various races , including when he famously led the tour de france and came off his bike . that was one of the tragedies of my sporting tv career . what is happening with active travel is genuinely transformational , and we continue to support it . i believe that the record of this government is good , but we can do more . it has been an honour and a privilege to respond to my hon . friend and her very important debate tonight . question put and agreed to . house adjourned .