the minister of state was asked — what recent diplomatic steps he has taken to help secure a sustainable ceasefire in gaza . what diplomatic steps he is taking to help end the conflict in israel and gaza . what recent discussions he has had with his counterpart in israel on the number of civilian deaths in gaza . what recent diplomatic steps he has taken to help secure a sustainable ceasefire in gaza . we are calling for an immediate humanitarian pause , in order to get aid in and hostages out as a vital step towards a sustainable , permanent ceasefire . that is all very well , but the problem is that netanyahu and the israeli government are simply ignoring all the pleas for restraint — those pleas have become empty words . what will the government do to put real pressure on the israelis to stop the unacceptable killings , enter into negotiations for a permanent ceasefire and stop the threats to permanently annex and occupy gaza ? has the time come to stop selling to israel arms that are being used to raze gaza to the ground ? as i told the house yesterday , the foreign secretary is in the region today and will pursue the vital policies that the hon . gentleman has set out . the hon . gentleman will know that it is an absolute priority for britain to ensure that more aid gets in , but the israeli government have the right of self - defence and , as the uk government continually make clear , they must exercise that right within international humanitarian law . like many other members , i am sure , i have received an extraordinary number of emails from constituents who are deeply concerned about what is going on — these are people who would never normally get in touch with their mp . we must stop the killing . my party and i believe that an immediate bilateral ceasefire is the way forward . what steps are the government taking with partners in the region and around the world to achieve that end ? all of us want a ceasefire , but it must be sustainable . that is why the british government are bent on ensuring that we get a humanitarian pause so that we can get far more supplies into gaza , and , on the back of that , a sustainable ceasefire . as i said in answer to according to the un world food programme , over half a million palestinians in gaza are starving . a famine is imminent . allegations against 12 united nations relief and works agency staff are rightly being investigated , but cutting aid to unrwa entirely is disproportionate and punitive . has the minister even considered the consequences of those cuts on women , babies and the seriously injured , and does he understand that they would breach the measures issued by the international court of justice to ensure that aid flows into gaza ? as i have set out to the house repeatedly , we are doing everything we can , along with others , to ensure that vital supplies get into gaza , for the very reasons that the hon . lady sets out . on unrwa , it would be impossible for any of us to continue business as usual , given the appalling events outlined over the weekend . that is why we have made it clear that we will not produce further finance until we are satisfied that those matters have been addressed . with regard to what we are seeking to do through unrwa now , we have provided additional funding in the past , and that will ensure that aid and vital supplies get into gaza . the government have consistently repeated their commitment to a two - state solution , and that is right , but for 30 years israel has deliberately undermined that through the settlement of the west bank , in contravention of international law . now netanyahu has come clean and ruled out a two - state solution , so does the minister agree that , if the uk ’s policy is to be seen as anything more than empty words , we need to demonstrate our commitment to a viable palestinian state by recognising it and by upgrading current government advice against trade with the illegal settlements to a full embargo ? the government ’s position on the issue of illegal settlements is absolutely clear . in respect of the two - state solution , i would point out to the hon . gentleman that progress has been made previously , in particular after grievous acts of terrible conflict and terrorism ; that is when the big leaps forward towards a resolution of this desperate problem have been made . we hope that on the back of the horrendous events that have taken place on the palestinian authority ’s grip on security control across the west bank has been pushed out by the malevolent forces of hamas , palestinian islamic jihad and local terror groups funded by iran . is it not the case that unilateral recognition of a palestinian state now would risk equipping those dangerous actors with the trimmings and capabilities of a state ? the british government have always been clear that we intend to recognise a palestinian state when the timing is right . my right hon . and learned friend will have heard the comments that the foreign secretary made last night , which in no way deviate from that policy ; the foreign secretary is pointing out how important it is to ensure that people can see that when a political track gets going , real progress can be made . if we can not have a ceasefire , a humanitarian pause would of course be very welcome , but it will only be of any use if we can get the aid that is so urgently required into gaza . what are the government doing to overcome what the foreign secretary has described as the “ ludicrous ” checking regime put in place by the israelis , and what more can we do to stop or avoid crowds of israelis from gathering at crossings into gaza , aiming to prevent aid from entering , and so obviate a famine ? on my right hon . friend ’s second point , i can assure him that we are in regular touch with all the relevant authorities to try to ensure that does not hinder the entry of aid . on his first point , we should all be aware that the issue is not that there is not enough aid in the region , but that it is not getting in . that is why the government , under the prime minister ’s specific instruction , have been investigating how to get aid in through all means , including from the sea and from a naval corridor . it is really disturbing that bbc online is reporting that the foreign secretary has changed the uk government ’s approach on recognition of a palestinian state . does the minister agree that bringing forward and accelerating unilateral recognition of a palestinian state would be to reward hamas ’s atrocity ? my right hon . friend will be aware that there is no question of rewarding hamas for the appalling acts they perpetrated in a pogrom on i call the shadow minister . the minister will know that there is rising anger in the region about the desperate situation in gaza , which makes a ceasefire much harder to achieve . more people are now dying of hunger and thirst than from bombs and bullets . he said yesterday that the uk is pausing funding to unrwa , not cutting it , but given its critical role , will he reassure us that nothing will disrupt the supply of aid — not just into gaza , but through gaza — now and in the months ahead ? he is right that these are serious allegations and we should be robust about how uk aid money is spent , but it would be unconscionable if we allowed anything to stand in the way of uk aid reaching those children right now . will he promise that the uk will move heaven and earth to get that aid to them ? the shadow minister for development is absolutely right about the balance that has to be struck . of course , we need to investigate rapidly the very serious allegations that have been made against unrwa , but the assets we use for getting aid and support into gaza depend on the assets that unrwa owns — warehouses , vehicles and the other distribution mechanisms . as such , we need that inquiry to be completed as rapidly as possible . in the meanwhile , britain was not intending to give any further support to unrwa in this financial year ; in the next financial year we will consider the position in precisely the way the shadow minister sets out . whether he is taking diplomatic steps to help reduce the risk of conflict in the west philippine sea . the uk is committed to the primacy of the united nations convention on the law of the sea , and to freedom of navigation and overflight . we oppose any action that raises tensions , or the risk of miscalculation , in the south china sea . the foreign secretary spoke to his philippino counterpart in december , and the fcdo issued a statement on i declare an interest , as chair of the all - party parliamentary group for the philippines . the minister is no doubt aware of a large number of videos posted on youtube and other outlets , showing chinese gunboats ramming and victimising philippine fishermen in the west philippine sea . this is a vital industry for the economy of the philippines , which , as she knows , is one of our key strategic partners in the region . what discussions has she had with her chinese counterpart to stop those unprovoked attacks and allow those peaceful fishermen simply to go about earning a livelihood to support their families ? i was in vietnam in october , speaking at the south china sea conference , and i set out very clearly the uk ’s position and raised the serious risks , which my hon . friend highlights , posed by these instances of unsafe conduct against philippino fishing vessels . the uk has provided £ 6.5 million in funding to support regional partners through an enhanced programme of maritime security capacity building in south - east asia , which includes training on the law of the sea , and we continue to provide that support to help maintain that free and open pacific . i thank the minister for that response . china is quite clearly a thuggish country ; a bully country that thinks it can step upon anybody . they have an insatiable demand and appetite for everybody else ’s resources . when will the time come that china will understand that they can not bully the wee person — that we will stand with that wee person against them ? the hon . gentleman sets out a really important position , and we want to continue to support and work closely with the philippines . i was able to co - chair the first uk - philippines strategic dialogue in november , where we are continuing to work with the philippines across a number of fronts on how we can support them to ensure that they can sustain their agency and present themselves the positions , as he highlights , of wanting to be able to use their waterways freely and unencumbered . what recent discussions he has had with his israeli counterpart on israel ’s political objectives in gaza . what plans the government have to recognise a palestinian state . what recent assessment he has made of the potential merits of the recognition of a palestinian state . what recent assessment he has made of the potential merits of the recognition of a palestinian state . we are clear that for a peaceful solution to this conflict there must be a political horizon towards a two - state solution . britain will recognise a palestinian state at a time when it best serves the objective of peace . bilateral recognition alone can not end the occupation . given the evidence of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by israel , and now recognition by the international court of justice of the risk of genocide being committed by israel , have the uk government sought to ascertain what the israeli military objective is in gaza , and does the minister agree with the motion tabled by the scottish national party at the council of europe last week , supported by nine nations and 20 members , that an immediate ceasefire and a resettlement scheme for those bombed out of gaza by israel are absolutely essential ? i have not seen the motion tabled by the snp — and i probably would not agree with it if i had . we are always focused on addressing the points that the hon . lady has made . when it comes to the international court of justice , and indeed international humanitarian law , the government ’s view is not the same as hers , but she may rest assured that we keep these things under very close review . there is now a live ongoing investigation by the icj into genocide in gaza . given the british government ’s reluctance thus far to recognise the state of palestine , does the minister not understand that failure to do so will soon result in the uk government just recognising a cemetery ? the government ’s position — and indeed , i believe , the position of those on the opposition front bench — has always been clear : we should recognise the state of palestine when the time is right . the foreign secretary last night added some further words to that commitment , but that is the commitment of the british government . last night the foreign secretary indicated that the uk government will consider recognising the palestinian state in order “ to give the palestinian people a political horizon so that they can see that there is going to be irreversible progress to a two - state solution ” . can the minister explain how that is possible when both the israeli national security minister and the finance minister have advocated using the ongoing war as an opportunity to permanently resettle palestinians from gaza and establish israeli settlements there , and the israeli prime minister has openly said he is proud to have prevented the establishment of a palestinian state ? the foreign secretary was making it clear that we need a credible route to a palestinian state and the offer of a new future . it is very important to lift people ’s eyes to the possibilities once a political track is established . i point out to the hon . gentleman that progress has been made . progress that was made at oslo took place on the back of appalling events when people reached for a political solution . the same is true of what followed the second intifada . the aim of the british government is to get a sustainable ceasefire and move to that political track . my right hon . friend ’s comments about a big leap forward are noble — i recognise that — but as long as hamas , who believe not in a two - state solution but in killing and raping jews , cling on in gaza ; as fatah is barely able to control the west bank ; and as israel is still in trauma , still trying to get 130 hostages , including babies , back from gaza , what does he think that talk about early recognition of palestinian statehood can achieve ? i recognise the voracity of what my right hon . friend says , but there is no change in the policy . he is right that hamas must agree to the release of all hostages , that hamas can no longer be in charge of gaza , and that we need an agreement to provide governance , service and security there , which will involve the palestinian authority . the foreign secretary , in his meetings with president abbas last week , sought to advance that agenda . on sunday , a third of knesset members attended a conference calling for the return of settlements to gaza and to the north of the occupied west bank . some of those members have also asked for a voluntary migration of palestinians from gaza , with israel taking over control . does the minister agree that that is not in the best interests of israel and that there should be a return to the pre-1967 borders , with both countries working together to maintain peace in the interests of their citizens ? yes , i do . the only viable long - term pathway is a two - state solution based on 1967 lines , with jerusalem as a shared capital , that guarantees security and stability for both israelis and palestinians . surely the only political objective in gaza is inextricably linked to the security objectives , because the grim reality is that hamas do not seek a ceasefire , and israel can not be reasonably expected to pursue one with a group who actively seek its destruction , not least the commitment made by a senior hamas official , ghazi hamad , who recently said : “ we must teach israel a lesson , and we will do this again and again ” , and that the “ just the first time , and there will be a second , a third , a fourth . ” the only political solution must be the elimination of hamas and the release of the hostages . that is why the government have made it clear that calls for a ceasefire on its own will simply not work . first , israel absolutely has the right of self - defence , to address and deal with the cause of the terrible events of i call the shadow foreign secretary . for a decade now , the labour party has supported palestinian recognition . as my right hon . and learned friend “ statehood is not in the gift of a neighbour . it is the inalienable right of the palestinian people . ” i welcome the foreign secretary adopting that position and rejecting the notion that recognition can only follow the conclusion of negotiations . after the unacceptable comments by prime minister netanyahu , does the prime minister agree that no country has a veto over the uk ’s decision to recognise palestine ? i can tell the shadow foreign secretary that we will pursue the policy that we think is right . the foreign secretary set out clearly in his remarks last night the importance of a credible route to a palestinian state and a new future . in respect of the conversations that the foreign secretary will have had last week with prime minister netanyahu , i can not trade the details across the house , but i can tell the right hon . gentleman that the foreign secretary will have represented the british position with prime minister netanyahu , whom he knows very well , with great accuracy . i call the snp spokesperson . palestinian recognition is an inalienable right , not a privilege to be conferred by others . although i was pleased to hear the foreign secretary say last night that the uk , “ with allies , will look at the issue of recognising a palestinian state ” , i feel we have been here before , most notably in 2014 . given netanyahu ’s categorical rejection of a palestinian state , what are the next steps ? when will we hear about them , and how confident can we be that we will not be sitting here in another 10 years , wishing we had acted to prevent a genocide ? it is not easy to sustain the view that we have been here before — at least not to this extent . the british government ’s policy has been clear on the recognition of the state of palestine . we are working extremely hard in the region and more widely internationally to secure a political track . the hon . gentleman will recognise that that will be in the mix once that political track is able to start . what steps his department is taking to support developing countries with climate change adaptation . we are committed to spending £ 1.5 billion on climate adaptation by 2025 . extreme weather is already causing huge devastation , especially in the poorest communities across the world , who are also the least likely to find investors or to borrow from global financial institutions . at cop28 there was a breakthrough , and a loss and damage fund has finally been established . however , the money for the uk ’s contribution will come from pre - existing climate finance commitments and the development budget . should the government , in the spirit of what the loss and damage fund represents , not establish a new , ringfenced loss and damage budget that is not taken from other budgets ? we did support setting up the loss and damage fund at cop28 and we contributed specifically towards it . however , it is important that loss and damage does not draw from the same donors and the same official development assistance budgets as other development . it has to be different . it was because the uae , as a non - traditional donor , put in $ 100 million to that fund that britain was willing to support it , but we need new and different donors and new and different sources of funds . i welcome the extremely important work the government are doing in protecting vulnerable communities around the world . will the minister confirm to me that the £ 3 billion that the government have committed for saving nature will be used on some of the very vulnerable habitat sites and animals around the world , such as those environmental audit committee saw on a recent visit to antarctica ? will he particularly think about whales , fur seals and of course the emperor penguin ? i will think about all the mammals my hon . friend has mentioned . i can assure him that our commitment is to biodiversity and to nature . we recognise the great importance of the work being done in the antarctic , and indeed the contribution that he makes to that . i call the shadow foreign secretary . from the floods to the fires , from melting ice sheets to ocean heat , the climate crisis is reaching a tipping point . labour has a plan at home : doubling onshore wind , trebling solar and ending new oil and gas licences in the north sea . labour has a plan internationally : a clean power alliance of developed and developing countries to drive forward the transition . is it not the truth that the government have no plan and have squandered britain ’s climate reputation to wage culture wars at home ? the reason the government were able to reduce the size of electricity bills for hard - working families was precisely because we are meeting our targets and will meet our international commitments . britain ’s international targets and commitments are enshrined in law as a result of the activities of this house . internationally we are committed , as the right hon . gentleman knows and as was set out to the house towards the end of last year , to spending £ 11.6 billion on ensuring that we meet our climate targets and produce climate finance . i would argue that that figure will be nearer £ 16 billion by 2026 . whether he has had recent discussions with his international counterparts on a strategy to reduce debt in the developing world . the government recently set out our commitments on developing country debt in our international development white paper . the main mechanism to tackle the debt crisis , the common framework for debt treatment , is failing due to the low level of participation by private creditors who own around 40 % of low - income country debt . does the minister agree that there is strategic need for the united kingdom to take debt reduction seriously and change its approach , given the crisis in africa and the growing role of china and russia in the developing world ? the hon . lady is right to point to the considerable difficulties that countries are finding . some 15 % of low - income countries are in debt distress , and 45 % are at higher risk of that . the african development bank says that debt repayments in 2024 are likely to be six times the level of 2021 . that is why britain is working with other creditors to secure debt restructurings , most often through the g20 common framework , but also through the paris club . what recent steps he has taken to help prevent an escalation of conflict in the middle east . the government are engaging extensively to prevent an escalation of conflict in the middle east . the prime minister spoke to president biden last week about that specific issue . i think we can all understand the anger towards israel for the way it is systematically demolishing gaza and needlessly killing so many of the people , as well as the need for it to be properly held to account . does the minister recognise that we must do everything to protect against others joining the conflict , and that activities such as those against the houthis must also be proportionate and accompanied by more diplomatic work across the region to stop wholesale killing ? the hon . gentleman is right to make clear that all of us seek that there should not be an escalation of this conflict in the middle east . that is why right at the start britain moved military assets to the eastern end of the mediterranean . more recently , as he alluded to , we are expressing strong support for freedom of navigation on the high seas , stopping attacks by the houthis . we are degrading their capacity to carry out their attacks , and have made clear that we will not accept that challenge to international freedom of the sea . one problem with the middle east is the sense of hopelessness among the palestinian people , which is fuelling terrorist outrages . what steps can the government take with our american friends to try to put pressure on the israeli state to stop the imposition of new settlements in the west bank , so that we can gradually reduce tensions in the whole region ? is that not the way forward ? we have made it clear that the settlements are illegal and should not have gone ahead and should not go ahead . on the wider point , we are working closely with our american friends and others through the superb diplomatic network that britain possesses , to try to lift people ’s eyes and move to the day after , when a political track can start . that is the answer to my right hon . friend ’s question — the political track , which can then start to offer hope in resolving this dreadful and long - standing problem . i call the shadow minister . today the middle east is in danger of seeing a major escalation of conflict , and whether it is in gaza , the red sea , lebanon , iraq , syria or jordan , we are seeing aggression . if there is a common denominator in those conflicts , it is the malign influence of iran , usually through its proxies . what are the government doing to disrupt and stop the disruptive activities of iran ? my right hon . friend the foreign secretary had a meeting recently with the iranian foreign minister to set out britain ’s view of and requirements from the relationship with iran , and i think that was a most useful contact to have . the foreign secretary is in the region today , trying to ensure that the very points behind this question are accepted and honoured . we are working extensively with jordan , egypt , qatar , israel , saudi arabia and america . those discussions are ongoing , and will address the point that the hon . gentleman has raised . what assessment he has made of the impact of the uk ’s non - military support to ukraine over winter 2023 - 24 on the humanitarian situation in that country . what recent diplomatic support he has provided to ukraine . what discussions he has had with his international counterparts on maintaining support for ukraine . what recent discussions he has had with his international counterparts on the war in ukraine . since february 2020 the uk has committed £ 357 million of humanitarian assistance to ukraine . in response to winter we scaled up humanitarian support with additional funding to provide cash assistance , insulation , and support for energy and heating . the foreign secretary ’s first overseas visit was to ukraine . he continues to set out the uk ambition to international partners and did so in november during nato and osce gatherings , and most recently at davos , where he met foreign minister kuleba . tim bamford , our local councillor for denby dale , has devoted his own time and expense to making several potentially dangerous excursions , driving a truck to deliver essential humanitarian aid to war - torn ukraine alongside volunteers from the yorkshire aid convoy . will the minister join me in thanking tim — who is sitting in the public gallery — and all the fantastic team at the yorkshire aid convoy for everything that they are doing to help the ukrainian people , and wish them a safe journey for their next trip in march ? i am delighted to join my hon . friend in thanking tim and tina bamford , both of whom are in the public gallery . the response of the british people to the tragedy in ukraine has been remarkable and hugely generous , and we salute the courage and generosity of spirit shown by the commendable actions of the yorkshire aid convoy . there are many billions of russian assets frozen by western nations , and there is a strong moral case for ukraine to use those assets to repel russia ’s aggression and rebuild its own economy . what progress has the department made in talking to other nations to make that a reality ? i agree that there is a strong moral case for using russian assets to repair the damage that russia has wrought on ukraine . we are clear about the fact that russia should pay , and we continue to assess what legal path there might be to achieving that end . the united nations high commissioner for refugees recently said : “ i think the big difference from last year to this year is that this year … there is somehow a trend towards getting used to ukrainian suffering . ” it is more than 200 days since the opposition tabled a motion necessitating government legislation to bring about the full seizure and repurposing of russian state assets within 90 days , but no plan has yet been forthcoming . why are the government so out of step with our allies and partners in this regard ? we are not out of step ; we are leading the pack , and have been doing so for the last two years . our resolve is shown by our own financial commitment but also by our permanent commitment to the uk - ukraine relationship , which was demonstrated when the prime minister signed the uk - ukraine agreement on security co - operation at the start of the year . we are in it for the long haul . tomorrow jens stoltenberg , the secretary - general of nato , will meet representatives of the heritage foundation , a republican - leaning think - tank . he will meet allies of former president trump in an effort to unlock $ 60 billion of funding for ukraine . what efforts are the government making to persuade trump ’s allies , and what contingency planning are they doing with our european allies for a scenario in which trump and his allies are not persuaded ? ministers engage constantly with counterparts around the world , including those in the us . when it comes to the nato response , we have seen nato expand and grow in the last two years . putin thought it was weak , but it is now bigger and stronger than it was in 2022 . i call the snp spokesperson . the international monetary fund estimates that ukraine needs $ 37 billion this year just to manage the books . there is a special european council meeting on thursday to sign off a package of € 50 billion in aid to ukraine . the uk government have been part of that coalition , so can the minister assure us that ukraine fatigue will not set in here ? there is backing across the house for the continuation of these supportive efforts , and surely the most effective way to get aid to ukraine is to transfer the seized russian assets to finance for ukraine ’s reconstruction . i assure the hon . gentleman that we feel no fatigue when it comes to our ukraine policy . we have exceeded last year ’s commitment in terms of lethal aid , and we will be contributing a huge amount of other aid and economic support . since 2022 , our total humanitarian , economic and military support has risen to more than £ 12 billion , which i think demonstrates that our resolve is unflagging . i share the concern of we continue to make that point to all our interlocutors . i should also say that we continue to make the point to all nato member states that investing 2 % of gdp in defence expenditure is a condition of membership . i met the leeds ukrainian community in my constituency this weekend to hear about the desperate needs of war - torn ukrainian citizens . with the hungarian leader viktor orbán continuing to veto the eu ’s £ 50 billion aid package to ukraine , what diplomatic steps is the minister taking to encourage hungary to play its part in supporting ukraine ’s fight for freedom ? we are very active in our diplomacy with hungary and neighbouring states . i was actually in slovakia last week , talking about a similar set of issues . diplomacy does matter and our judgment is that , in the end , mr orbán will do the right thing . what recent discussions he has had with his international counterparts on the state of relations between iran and pakistan . the foreign secretary has made it clear to his iranian counterpart that iran must stop using regional instability as cover to act recklessly . he and lord ahmad have also underlined to pakistan ’s foreign minister the importance of avoiding further escalation . we welcome iran and pakistan ’s subsequent commitment to dialogue in a joint statement released on as the minister said , diplomatic efforts have eased tensions following the exchange of missiles earlier this month . however , the minister will be aware that , over the weekend , iranian gunmen murdered nine pakistanis in the iranian city of saravan . the fact that both countries have launched air strikes against each other indicates how fragile the situation is in the middle east , and how interconnected acts of war and violence are across the whole region . how will the british government ensure that their own actions do not escalate tensions ? as i said , iran must stop using regional instability as cover to carry out its reckless acts . we recognise that it bears responsibility for any further escalation , and we are looking at all the tools that we have to bear down on the iranian regime , including sanctions . what recent assessment he has made of the implications for his policies of the human rights situation in eritrea . we continue to press eritrea bilaterally and at the un human rights council to end human rights violations . it may come as a surprise to the house to hear that eritrea is an elected member of the un human rights council . as chair of the all - party parliamentary group on eritrea , i often hear the country described as the north korea of africa . young people are conscripted indefinitely , and critics of the regime are arbitrarily detained and disappeared . does the minister agree that that perhaps explains why over 90 % of asylum claims from eritreans in the uk are granted by the home office ? what more can the government do to take steps to ensure an end to human rights abuses in eritrea and elsewhere in the horn of africa , which are push factors behind irregular arrivals in the uk ? i think the hon . gentleman pulls his punches ; it is worse than he said . eritrea ranks towards the bottom of the world press freedom index . we urge eritrea to allow the un special rapporteur for human rights access to the country , and we also seek the full withdrawal of eritrean troops from northern ethiopia , in accordance with the pretoria peace agreement . we must not forget the abuses that are happening in neighbouring sudan . over 7 million people have been internally displaced , with 20 million in desperate need of humanitarian aid . last night , the international criminal court prosecutor told the un security council that there are reasonable grounds to believe that both the sudan armed forces and the rapid support forces are committing atrocious crimes in darfur . what hope does the minister have that we can end the impunity , stop the rapes , murder and pillage , and bring peace to the people of sudan ? we are calling for an immediate ceasefire . there were talks in addis before christmas . we seek progress through the united nations , where we hold the pen on sudan , and also through the troika , the intergovernmental authority on development and the african union . we are doing everything we can to end the appalling situation in sudan , which my right hon . friend has just described with great eloquence . what discussions he has had with his international counterparts on the situation of the hazara community in afghanistan . the uk works closely with the international community including the g7 and g20 and through the un to protect the human rights of all of afghanistan ’s people and to co - ordinate a consistent international response . in december my colleague the minister for south asia in the other place raised the recent attacks on hazaras with the un assistance mission in afghanistan . last week the hon . lady sets out some of the shocking issues that we know about . indeed , daesh claimed responsibility for the november attacks and we are continuing to see these challenges . i will happily take back her question to my colleague , and i am sure that he will be happy to meet them . i call shadow minister catherine west . since the summer of 2021 , when the hopes and dreams of so many women and girls in afghanistan were snuffed out , we have been struggling to get a strategy together . for 20 years the uk , international partners and afghans themselves fought for a more hopeful future for women and girls . will the minister outline what steps are being taken with international partners to develop a sustained strategy for working in the region so that we can regain a sense of hope for the 40 million afghans left behind to a future devoid of opportunity ? the hon . lady highlights the frustration that we all feel . we are working closely with international partners at a number of levels to ensure credible monitoring not only of the violence and threats against religious minorities but of the challenges for women and girls across the piece . we co - sponsored a human rights council resolution extending the mandate of the un special rapporteur to monitor and report on the human rights situation , to try to make decisions together on how to tackle it . what recent assessment he has made of the strength of the uk ’s diplomatic relationship with china . the government set out their approach to china in the integrated review refresh last year . we must continue to engage with china to work towards open , constructive and stable relations to manage disagreements , defend our freedoms and co - operate where our interests align . the foreign secretary spoke with china ’s foreign minister wang yi on the results of economic modelling from the rhodium group , the rand corporation and , earlier this month , bloomberg on the impact on global gdp of either an economic blockade by china on taiwan or a full - scale invasion , are horrifying . am i right that the government have done their own economic modelling for both those scenarios ? if so , will the minister publish it ? the hon . gentleman highlights the importance of understanding and planning for such economic coercion . this is an area of policy that sits within my portfolio in the fcdo . across government , we currently have a lot of focus on thinking about how we can build resilience in uk interests and support partners . if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . the government are pursuing vital british national interest priorities . we are supporting ukraine , and the prime minster has announced a further package of military support . we support israel ’s right to self - defence and are working towards a sustainable ceasefire and tackling the humanitarian crisis in gaza . we continue strongly to support freedom of navigation on the high seas and to seek to make progress on sudan . we are implementing the international development white paper , which has been well received around the world . i continue to deputise for the foreign secretary in this house and regularly seek to keep the house updated . the united nations special rapporteur on the right to food , michael fakhri , said at the weekend that more than 2 million people in gaza were facing “ inevitable famine ” . now that the government have opted to halt funding to the un relief and works agency for palestine refugees , how do they intend to ensure that the urgently needed humanitarian aid — as called for in the international court of justice ruling last week and which was central to the ruling — will continue to be delivered to the innocent men , women and children in gaza , who must have a right to food ? as i set out , the government ’s highest immediate priority is to ensure that aid and humanitarian support get into gaza . we are relentlessly pursuing that objective . i have set out where we are on unrwa , but there is no immediate effect on the food that it seeks to deliver in gaza today . i understand that my noble friend the foreign secretary will shortly be visiting india , our friend and key ally in the region . will the minister set out what the foreign secretary will be aiming to achieve , particularly at a time when we are negotiating a free trade deal and building on the co - operation we already have ? although i can not comment in detail on future ministerial plans , i assure my hon . friend that the uk government have a broad and deep partnership with the government of india . the foreign secretary has ambitions to further strengthen that relationship through trade and wider people - to - people relationships in defence , science and technology . on i call the shadow minister . access to critical minerals is vital as we face a climate and energy crisis , but this government have repeatedly disregarded latin america and ignored its potential . will the minister commit to working with countries such as chile , brazil , peru and mexico to deliver these essential supplies for a green energy transition ? both sides of the house agree that this is an important issue , and i can assure the hon . lady that we are working very hard . i have raised the importance of critical minerals on my visits to all those countries , and not least on my recent visit to bolivia . by any measure our world is becoming more dangerous , not less . i very much welcome britain ’s leadership and rekindled engagement on the international stage , not least in ukraine and the middle east . does the minister agree that our foreign policy , our economy and , indeed , our security are interdependently related ? given the deteriorating threat picture , would he like to see an increase in our defence posture ? my right hon . friend , the former chairman of the defence committee , is absolutely right to focus on these threats . the foreign secretary recently said that all the lights on the global dashboard are flashing red . the government know that the first duty of the state is to defend and protect its citizens from external aggression , and my right hon . friend may rest assured that that will continue to be our highest priority . tensions are soaring across the middle east after washington vowed to respond to the drone attack by iran - backed militants that killed three american soldiers . does the minister share my concern that we may be dragged into another regional war at the americans ’ demand ? the american government and the british government have made it absolutely clear that they do not wish to see this conflict escalate more widely . equally , the hon . gentleman will accept that no country can accept with equanimity the appalling deaths of those american soldiers . i call the chair of the foreign affairs committee . british citizen vladimir kara - murza has been moved from a siberian prison to an unknown location , having endured four months of isolation . why ? because his voice of freedom is such a threat to putin . vladimir has been poisoned twice and , under russian law , should not even be in prison . what progress has been made on locating vladimir and getting him released , so that we do not see him die in prison ? what have we done to appoint a lead director for arbitrary detention ? as the foreign secretary has said , we are deeply concerned about the reports that mr kara - murza has been moved from the penal colony in omsk to an unknown location . we are urgently following up to ascertain his whereabouts . of course , ministers have consistently condemned his politically motivated conviction and have called for his release , both publicly and privately . we will continue to do that at every opportunity . we have sanctioned 13 individuals in response to this case . i have met mrs kara - murza and , of course , the foreign secretary has offered to meet her to discuss the case with officials in due course . yesterday , as the right hon . member for chelmsford ( vicky ford ) alluded to , an icc prosecutor said that there are “ grounds to believe ” that both the sudanese army and the rapid support forces are committing war crimes in darfur . will the minister outline what diplomatic steps the department is taking to help to stop the violence ? the hon . lady is absolutely right in her analysis of what is happening in sudan — throughout sudan , and in particular in darfur — where there is clear evidence of crimes against humanity being committed . britain holds the pen at the united nations , as i said earlier to my right hon . friend today is world neglected tropical diseases day and as i am sure the minister is well aware , malaria affects more than 250 million people every year and causes the death of a child every minute . given the news that the british - backed r21 vaccination has gained pre - qualification at the world health organisation , what commitment will my right hon . friend give towards further support , including through the next replenishment of gavi , the vaccine alliance ? last week , i had the opportunity to visit the jenner institute at oxford to see the remarkable people who made that progress . every day , malaria kills entirely unnecessarily more than 1,000 children under five and pregnant women . thanks to that brilliant british invention and technology , i hope very much that we will be able to make malaria history within the foreseeable future . the decision to pull funding from unrwa , the united nations relief and works agency , the day after the international court of justice called for increased aid to get into gaza has been branded reckless by 21 aid agencies , including oxfam . what assessment have the government made of the number of additional palestinians now at risk of death from disease or starvation as a result of pulling that funding ? the government have been very clear about the position with unrwa . we can not overlook the appalling events that have been reported , but we are seeking to ensure that they are properly investigated . britain has no additional funding plans for this financial year . we have already funded unrwa , as have others , so i have no doubt that unrwa ’s support , getting food to those who desperately need it , will continue , but we can not ignore the information that was brought to our attention . i spent yesterday with nato . one significant concern expressed to me was the acute need for the us to fulfil its commitment to ukraine in 2024 . ahead of the washington summit , will the minister assure me that every effort will be taken to leverage political pressure on our allies and to secure the necessary support , for which we are very grateful ? on the road to washington , we continue to make that point . the us will continue to be an integral part of european security , as will other european member states of nato , which should ensure that they commit to their equal and required expenditure of 2 % . the minister has been clear about the extremely dangerous situation in sudan . i have a number of constituents still waiting for the uk government to process their applications for their family members to come to safety here , and hampered by the inability to travel over international borders . what conversations has he had with his counterparts in neighbouring countries such as egypt to allow facilitation of the movement of people through there out of the dangers in sudan to safety in the uk ? we talk continually to the surrounding countries and have given specific support to chad in dealing with people coming over the border . the situation in sudan that the hon . lady describes is absolutely appalling , with nearly 18 million people urgently needing food . if she wishes to discuss her specific cases with me and the foreign office , we should do so straight after question time . this year marks the 120th anniversary of the signing of the entente cordiale with france , 80 years since d - day and 30 years since the opening of the channel tunnel . does my right hon . friend agree that this is an incredibly important moment to reinvigorate that important bilateral relationship ? my right hon . friend will have seen the stratospheric improvement in relations with france and its president that have taken place under our right hon . friend the prime minister . he and i were celebrating 120 years of the entente cordiale at the french residence last week . i have no doubt that that relationship , especially now , is in excellent condition . women are unequally affected in conflict . we have heard accounts of horrific rapes perpetrated by hamas , of women assuming heavy care responsibilities due to failing medical infrastructure in gaza , and of women being trafficked out of nigeria , to name three recent examples . will the minister comment on the department ’s work to provide a better future for women in conflict zones ? the hon . lady has raised a most important matter . women bear the brunt of poverty , conflict and starvation . that is why the british government have made it clear , particularly in the white paper , that this matter remains a top priority . the white paper announced £ 38 million of additional spending to support women ’s rights organisations . as we know , women ’s rights are under threat all around the world , and we are doing everything we can to support girls and women . as new heartbreaking testimonies of hamas ’s use of sexual violence and rape come to light from survivors of the i hope that my hon . friend will draw strength and satisfaction from the fact that the british government are not silent on that very important matter . i am sure that the minister was as shocked as i was by venezuela ’s actions towards guyana last year . will he update the house , and me — i have guyanese heritage — on what steps the government are taking to uphold guyana ’s sovereignty ? i thank the hon . member for that question on an important subject close to the heart of several people in the chamber . i assure her that there is ongoing engagement with , of course , president ali in guyana , but also all the regional players . i have personally had conversations with brazil , colombia , the commonwealth and the united states to keep the focus on that area , and maduro ’s plans at bay . what assessment have the government made of the threat to the future of the baltic states if putin is seen to succeed in seizing territory permanently from ukraine ? the baltic states are on the frontline , and we therefore take great pride in the enhanced forward presence in the baltic states , which includes our magnificent men and women in tapa . that is part of our enduring physical presence to ensure that nato has security on the ground . the matter is sharply in focus . as the death toll rises in gaza , so does the misery of women and girls in the occupied territories . i am increasingly concerned that aid is not getting to them . the united nations says that there is a chronic aid access problem , and that women are having caesarean sections without anaesthetic . what is going on ? is the aid not getting to them ? what steps is the department taking to ensure that it does ? tackling this is britain ’s central aim ; the aim is to get humanitarian aid into gaza , but also to ensure that there is a plan on the west bank to take forward a political initiative . everything that we are doing is bent on trying to get the aid that is in the region through the narrow entrances into gaza . we will continue to do that . the minister has said several times in the last few days that the government ’s decision to suspend funding for unrwa should not affect that agency ’s ability to deliver immediate aid in the region . if it transpires in the days and weeks ahead that the opposite is the case and the agency is being compromised , will the government immediately review their decision ? yesterday , i spoke to the head of unrwa , philippe lazzarini . i made the point that it is essential that his review — which of course he is not conducting ; the un is conducting it — is completed as fast as possible for the reasons the hon . gentleman set out . i am reasonably confident that it can be conducted within the next two months , and the british government are watching this carefully . will the minister confirm whether the government have undertaken any further military action in yemen since we are careful to ensure that our response to the houthis in yemen is proportionate and right . we are conscious of the importance of getting food into yemen to feed people who are starving . that process is hindered by the grossly irresponsible acts of the houthi terrorists . yasin malik , a political leader of the jammu kashmir liberation front , was given a life sentence in 2022 . the indian authorities appealed that sentence last year , seeking the death penalty , and the judgment is due on we always continue to make it clear that we disagree with the death penalty . my colleague the minister for south asia raised this issue most recently on the foreign office recorded over 500 deaths of uk nationals in thailand in 2022 , some 135 of which were of undetermined cause . in 2022 and the 10 years before then , no murders were recorded of uk nationals in thailand . my constituent ’s son was murdered in thailand in 2019 . does the minister still maintain that uk nationals do not get murdered in thailand ? we work closely with thailand , and our officials in the country , led by our ambassador , do a great deal of work around these difficult issues when they arise . i have picked up some of the consular cases myself . if there are specific issues that the hon . gentleman wishes to raise , i am happy to meet him to discuss them . i have 10 and 11 - year - old constituents — british citizens — who are stuck in the israeli fire zone in southern lebanon . the foreign office is urging them to return to the uk , but as their mother is not a british citizen , the home office is preventing that . will the minister help me to persuade the home office to relent on this issue ? i am happy to look at the case that the hon . gentleman raises immediately after question time , if that is convenient to him . the foreign secretary is in the region today , not far away from the country that the hon . gentleman mentions , and i am sure that we will be able to advance the talks that are going on . ( urgent question ): to ask the secretary of state for culture , media and sport if she will make a statement on the proposed sale of the telegraph media group to redbird imi . i am grateful to my hon . friend for tabling the urgent question for the second time in as many days . this is a media - focused day for me , as i will take the media bill through its remaining stages straight after the urgent question , so forgive me if one has made me insufficiently prepared for the other , or vice versa . i am in the frustrating circumstance that i can say only what is publicly known and nothing of the specifics in answer to questions about the ownership of the telegraph media group , which contains two of the world ’s greatest newspapers — the sunday telegraph and the daily telegraph — and , in the spectator , the oldest surviving weekly magazine in the world . as hon . members will be aware , my right hon . and learned friend the secretary of state for culture , media and sport has issued a public interest intervention notice in respect of the anticipated acquisition of the group by rb investco ltd , further to the notice issued in november in respect of the redbird imi media joint venture , which remains in force . she is leading this process and examining it in great detail and with great care , but it is a quasi - judicial process , involving the competition and markets authority , which looks at jurisdictional and competition matters , and ofcom , which will be reporting to her on public interest considerations in relation to the media , expressly accurate presentation of the news and free expression of opinion . both reports will be returned on my right hon . and learned friend , as a very assiduous and diligent kc , is making sure that i , as media minister , am absolutely excluded from the process , because that is what it demands . i am not permitted to know about the scrutiny that is under way , or to interfere with it . she is also not permitted to take into account any political or presentational concerns in her deliberations , and we would not wish to cause there to be any chink of light here that would leave the process open to judicial review . that leaves me in an unenviable position : i face understandable expert probing by hon . members , to whom i can offer no answer beyond what is in the public domain . however , this urgent question is as much an opportunity for hon . members to make their concerns clear and their views known , as it is an opportunity for me to answer them . so i say : be heard , loud and clear . straight after this urgent question , i will take the media bill through its remaining stages and make the case for that legislation in broad terms . i will argue that a free media , not interfered with by government or indeed governments , able to articulate and reflect a broad range of views , free to speak and create , and able to project to the world what democracy , a plurality of views and debate truly mean , is something important that we should value . in many respects , it underpins what we mean by a free society . of course , we all know that ; it is something that we repeat , automaton - like , in a way that risks giving rise to complacency . however , as i watch the actions of authoritarian states in these times of turbulence ; as i see western democracies in a knot of angst over our values ; and as i see our populations question , from the safety of these shores , whether our values still matter , i am reminded of the need to make that case again and again . i can not speak to the specific media ownership question — i know hon . members will understand that , and will help me keep within the tramlines — but i can speak about media freedom ; the need for media to be separate from political and government interference ; the importance of a british voice , domestically and internationally ; and the pride we can feel in media institutions , such as those in the telegraph media group , some of which date back two centuries and drove changes in this nation as profound as the great reform act . to this day , those who write for those institutions ask questions of us all with a rare inquisitiveness and preoccupation with truth . [ interruption . ] i shall finish shortly . i will be hearing — order . please do not tell me what you are going to do . i am in charge of the time . you are way over , and i expect you now to finish quickly . i apologise , mr speaker , for over - speaking . i will listen to the points made , in the broadest of terms , and i suspect that i may agree with many of them . thank you for granting this important urgent question , mr speaker . the minister hits the nail on the head when she says that this is about freedom from government interference , although it is quite something for us to start this urgent question knowing that we will get no answer to any of our questions . we have a proud tradition of a fiercely independent press in our country — a press who hold us to account in this place , and shine a light on misbehaviour and misdoings here and abroad . yet a paper of record , the daily telegraph , and the spectator , the longest - running magazine in the world and my personal podcast of choice , will be purchased by a foreign state . the concern here is about not foreign ownership , but foreign state ownership ; in this situation , we can not separate sheikh and state . those are our concerns . more broadly , i worry that we have allowed our media — critical national infrastructure for our democracy — to fall between the cracks . our defending democracy taskforce looks only at electoral concerns , and the national security and investment act 2021 deals with 17 sectors , none of which is the media . we therefore have no protections against this sort of situation . i have four questions that i hope the minister will at least attempt to answer — i appreciate the restrictions that are in place . first , are there any examples from around the world of a nation with differing media values , to put it politely , acquiring the newspaper of another country ? secondly , will the government commit to a national security investigation of these purchases ? thirdly , do the government not recognise that their intervention in the united arab emirates ’ purchase of vodafone sets a precedent allowing them to intervene in this case ? finally , will they look either to extend the defending democracy taskforce or those 17 sectors , to ensure that we can protect our media ? we are dealing with something that will make us vulnerable not for five or 10 years , but for the rest of our lives , and we can not afford for our media to be undermined . i thank my hon . friend for her questions . as she is aware , a public interest intervention notice has been issued in this case , which means that i am not able to speak to a number of the points that will likely be raised . however , powers under the enterprise act 2002 allow us to look into acquisitions of this nature and to examine issues of media freedom of expression . we also have powers under the national security act 2023 ; the cabinet office has a role there . that will allow the culture secretary to look at some of the questions that my hon . friend raises . there will now be an investigation by not only the competition and markets authority , but ofcom , which will look into all these questions in great detail . that will allow the secretary of state to make a judgment on what action she takes next . there may potentially be a longer investigation , after which she could be offered particular remedies , or could prevent a transaction . however , at this stage , i can not speculate on what action she is likely to take . i call the shadow secretary of state . i am frustrated with the minister . i want to thank her for her answer , but frankly , it was not an answer . we on these benches recognise the legitimate public interest concerns raised over the proposed acquisition of the telegraph media group , including about the accurate presentation of news , free expression of opinion in newspapers and the competition issues . i welcome the fact that the government have asked further questions , and i await the conclusions of the investigations by the competition and markets authority and ofcom in full . but the telegraph has been up for sale for months — the secretary of state issued her first public interest intervention notice on can the minister tell the house why the secretary of state has granted an extension to the deadline by which she expects to receive reports from ofcom and the cma in relation to the piin ? i am sure she can not , but i am just going to ask anyway . can the minister tell the house — this is a general one , so maybe she can — whether , in the light of the proposed sale , she has any plans to review the existing rules on media ownership ? has she or the secretary of state considered that or had any conversations with colleagues about it ? with a general election approaching , in a significant year for democracy across the world and with record numbers of people going to the polls , the freedom of the press has never been more important . now is not the time for the government to have no answers or to be asleep at the wheel . i thank the hon . lady for her rather hyperbolic intervention . we are having a debate because two public interest intervention notices have been issued . the government take their powers in this respect seriously , and the competition and markets authority and ofcom will be given the space and time to look into all these issues in detail . those notices were issued because the secretary of state takes the issues of media freedom and the ownership of important british media institutions extremely seriously . i therefore ask the hon . lady to help us . those investigations are under way ; we must not prejudice them and must ensure they are watertight . the important question of media ownership is something that all members of this house care about . it would be regrettable if i were to say anything in this chamber that should prejudice that process , so i say again to the hon . lady that action has been taken , it is something the government take seriously , and i ask her to let the process take its course . it is hugely new for us to be told that we will not get our questions answered at the dispatch box . we are used to that happening anyway , but it is good to be told that it is a waste of our time being here in the first place . to press on with not being answered , i say to the minister that i and 28 others , across all parties , wrote a letter to her department specifying that we were all opposed to this potential takeover . we made it clear that we are not opposed to it because we dislike that particular government — although i have to say that that may well be a feature . rather , we would oppose it if the french government wished to buy the newspapers , or even if this government decided they would control them . we would oppose that on the basis that it would trample right across the idea of freedom of the press . following the notice that has gone to the cma , i simply ask the minister whether she would ask the secretary of state to create a new piin on the basis that redbird imi has twice disrupted the government ’s efforts to properly scrutinise the purchase . particularly with the idea of debt being loaded into the purchase , we need a further detailed investigation . i would be grateful if the minister did that , because this could easily turn into a disaster for this government . i did not say i would give no answers ; i said i would be able to give general answers , and my right hon . friend will understand why . these are very precise processes that must be kept watertight , and i would not want to do anything to prejudice them or the secretary of state ’s ability to act in a way that is in the interests of this country and the media . this is not a waste of time . it is an opportunity for this house to make its voice and opinions known on what is a controversial issue of great public interest — an issue that we as a government are very interested in . my right hon . friend also makes the important point that his concern is not about the government in this particular case , but about government ownership in principle . it is something i appreciate and understand , and i am sure it will be in the secretary of state ’s mind . when hosting cop28 , sultan al - jaber said that there was “ no science ” behind the climate change emergency . the sultan is head of the uae media council , and influential in the telegraph takeover . i worked for many years as a journalist ; i understand that democracy requires plurality in the media landscape . sadly , in the uk the vast majority of titles are already skewed to the right — in scotland , as we know , half the population support independence , but only one title supports that position . we do not want the situation worsening . i am in favour of a free , diverse and vibrant press ecosystem , and not in favour of a newspaper being owned as a loss - making public relations arm of a foreign state through access to our daily news cycle . does the minister agree that allowing the uae to take over the telegraph would be unhealthy in principle for our democracy ? i thank the hon . gentleman for raising an issue of principle , which i perfectly understand , as something that i speak about in relation to the bbc , and how it must have editorial independence from the government . as a principle , i would be concerned about government ownership of any media institution , but as he will be aware , i can speak only of principles . when the wonderful taylor swift discovered that her back catalogue had been bought by a purchaser of whom she disapproved , she began to render it worthless by re - recording all her previous hits . is that an example that journalists at the spectator and the telegraph might do well to follow ? i thank my right hon . friend for his mischievous suggestion . i could not possibly comment on it , but i am sure that it has been heard . i am reeling from the comparison of telegraph hacks with taylor swift . if the minister can not answer questions , maybe we could use this as an exercise in issuing some concerns . the national union of journalists ’ concerns are obviously about jobs , but they are also about future editorial independence . it behoves the minister and the government to look at what sanctions could be used in future if agreements are reached but not kept to — murdoch is the best example of that . in addition , i wonder whether it is time , as my hon . friend i thank the right hon . gentleman for speaking on behalf of the nuj and for raising what this means for media plurality and the ability of journalists to hold us here to account . i agree on those generalities , but i am afraid i can not say anything more about the specifics of this case , as he will be aware . once the process is over , i am sure there will be questions to go back to about how we best look into how our media is owned . for what it is worth , the proposal is said to enhance the competitive landscape , not diminish it . does the minister agree that this sort of decision must be made according to legal principles , not politics ? it is not appropriate to consider political posturing from the left or right when deciding this important matter , which is part of the secretary of state ’s quasi - judicial functions . my right hon . and learned friend is right to say that the secretary of state will be under specific obligations to consider this matter without politics . both the cma and ofcom will look at this carefully from a regulatory point of view . we as politicians should also have a right to some broad views about media ownership as we consider those questions . the secretary of state is the departmental owner of culture , media and sport , and will have some considerations about how to ensure a dynamic media landscape . i am sure that she will carefully apply her legal brain to the application of those principles . i think the house sees me for what i am , which is a shy and retiring member . for years i have been teased in the telegraph at the hands of mr alan cochrane , and more recently in the spectator . but that is democracy ; it is the nature of the beast , and it is free speech . i agree with i hope the hon . gentleman does not mind me saying so , but i believe that when i last saw him , he was on his way to a spectator burns night party , so i hope the relationship is warm and cordial now , with no unkindness towards him from that magazine . as i said at the outset , this is a useful exercise in making the views of this house known on this matter . it is an important opportunity for members to have their say , and i hope that they will be heard . i must say i was amused by the minister ’s opening remarks , because i can not recall any judicial review ever being triggered by statements in parliament — not once . however , given that she wants a statement , not a question , in the event that the cma and ofcom report finds conditionally in favour in any way , she must not take the murdoch ownership of the times as an example , because since the sacking of its editor , that has been a failure , not a success . as my right hon . friend will be aware , the decision - making process is not mine . i will not be the person to make a judgment call on this matter . the cma and ofcom have until i thank the minister very much for her answers , which are always very helpful , and we appreciate that . can she outline if measures can and will be put in place to secure editorial freedom in the long term ? we look to a nation with completely different ideals , but which has capacity to shape the media narrative and public information . how can we make sure that we retain trust ? as the hon . gentleman will be aware , a public notice has been issued on this matter . ofcom will look expressly at accurate presentation of the news and free expression of opinion when it makes its reports and judgments known . i hope that will give him some assurance about how the media considerations will be looked at , not just the competition aspects . i fully understand the limitations on what my hon . friend can say . having covered for her until a few weeks ago as media minister , i was given no inside information about this matter , either . however , she will be aware that it is now over five years since the ofcom report to the secretary of state that said that the internet has transformed the way that news is provided and consumed , and that there will need to be a fundamental review of the media ownership regime . does she agree with that , and can she say whether the government will undertake that review ? i thank my right hon . friend for his expert cover for me . we discussed that subject in our handover , when he told me that there was no information that he could share because he was assiduous in his role and made sure that he was not involved in areas that he should not be . he asked about future ownership questions . he will be aware that we are debating the media bill after this urgent question . we have looked at some issues in relation to media , in particular the changing media landscape and how the internet has changed it . that has not covered all the issues that will be raised by this acquisition , but i am sure that once that the media bill has completed all its stages , we will be able to look afresh at the other holes in the landscape . i appreciate that there is a limit to what the minister can say about the potential sale of the daily telegraph to owners backed by the uae , but are there any lessons for media freedom that the government might learn from the creation of university branch campuses in the uae , and what that has meant for freedom of speech ? i am afraid that is not a subject about which i know a great deal . i shall happily look into it and see whether there are any implications for our media landscape , but i can not comment in relation to this specific acquisition . does the minister agree that the fact that we are in this position shows that clarity is needed about media ownership rules ? we need a presumption against sovereign foreign states acquiring strategic uk media assets to further their influence , just as there should one be against acquisition by a foreign oligarch who might not have a commitment to the media . we need some certainty about how and where such an intervention can be made , and not purely on competition grounds . that point has been raised by a number of hon . members . we have tools for these kinds of acquisitions , as can be seen in the public interest intervention notices that we have imposed in this case . i reassure members that we are not totally naked on this question ; there are tools , under the enterprise act , that allow us to look into it . i am sure that once the process is over , we will be able to look back and say whether any further action or intervention is required . as owners expect to have influence over editors and the editorial line , why do we not have a policy of ruling out all government ownership of such organisations , which would make it much simpler ? i thank my right hon . friend for making that simple point . it is one that i am sure will be considered once this case has passed . were a media outlet in an authoritarian state , or indeed any other state , to be threatened with foreign ownership , would the minister responsible be as scrupulous in her answers as my hon . friend has so properly been with us today ? perhaps not . i am sure that many members are , like me , concerned about foreign ownership of our institutions and businesses . our national resilience , strategic independence and critical infrastructure , as well as our media , are vital . to quote the well - known album , how do we ensure that we do not end up selling england by the pound ? as i have said in answers to similar questions , we have powers to look into some of those investment and ownership questions , and they do not relate just to the media . we now have much broader national security and investment powers in relation to questions such as these and to other areas in which there is a critical national interest in the ownership of a particular asset . it would be wrong for members to leave the chamber with the belief that there are no such powers and that all these acquisitions can go ahead regardless of security and other implications . the minister is absolutely right : ofcom can apply a test , which it already applies , to broadcast licences . does she agree that , given the changes in the media landscape , that should be rolled over to news websites and publishers that have significant scale ? we are looking at how we regulate online content alongside standard broadcasting and other media output . one outcome of the mid - term review is that some of the bbc ’s online material will be considered in the same way as its other output . those are all questions that the department is looking into to ensure that media regulation and legislation are fit for what is a rapidly changing media landscape . it is clear that paying off the debt means that redbird imi has control over the titles . indeed , it has already transferred the ownership of that debt to a new uk entity . should not the secretary of state also issue a piin on the debt to ensure that she retains control of the situation ? my hon . friend will be aware that this is the second such notice to have been issued . i am not able to speculate on or speak about any other action that the secretary of state might be minded to take . i know that he will understand that . he will know that the broad principles of concern to him , about which he has written so eloquently and powerfully in recent weeks and months , are also close to my heart . motion for leave to bring in a bill ( i beg to move , that leave be given to bring in a bill to make provision about the training of teachers in relation to the early identification of autism ; and for connected purposes . for those with autism , the stats are stark . fewer than half of autistic children say that they are happy in school ; 73 % of young autistic people say that their teachers do not understand their needs ; only 20 % achieve grade 5 or above in english and maths gcses , compared with 52 % for all pupils ; and , on top of that , autistic children are twice as likely to be excluded from school than their peers . it does not get better in adulthood . just 29 % of autistic people are in full or part - time employment , and those in work are paid a third less than their peers . that is not right , especially when the potential of autistic children with proper support should not be underestimated . autistic people have stronger attention to detail , creative talents , mathematical and technical abilities , and expertise in niche areas . those of us who know autistic children know that they are honest and loyal . we all know that an early diagnosis helps to identify what an individual child needs and what adjustments need to be put in place so that their strengths can be maximised . it provides a positive pathway instead of a negative one . it means that those with autism are more likely to find work . it helps to combat mental health issues , which affect 54 % of those with special educational needs and disabilities and cost the uk economy £ 582 million . however , 92 % of children wait longer than the nhs 13 - week deadline , and 46 % wait more than 18 months — that backlog means that a quarter of children with autism will not be diagnosed while in school . in norfolk between 2021 and october 2023 , 1,141 under-18s were diagnosed with autism . many wait longer than 18 months for their diagnosis — some even wait three years , and one waited 10 years . how many more of the 187,000 children in norfolk will not be assessed at all ? the question is , why does a diagnosis not happen until much later ? unfortunately , there is often a “ wait and see ” attitude . however , not only is a delay in diagnosis extremely damaging for a child who is autistic , but it is unnecessary . conditions such as autism have markers from six months old , as it becomes obvious through the way children learn , move or pay attention . existing weaknesses in the send system , which were magnified by the pandemic , also make it difficult for people with autism to get a diagnosis . there are inconsistencies in how send is identified , a lack of joined - up thinking on care , and a lack of clarity regarding accountability and responsibility in organisations . that leads to delays in an already weak system , making the fight that many parents undertake to have their child assessed even harder . over a year ago in this chamber , i mentioned hayley turner , a constituent who came to me as she was having difficulty getting the right support for her son , rocky . i was asking about early years psychologists in education questions , but it was partly through conversations with hayley that the inspiration for this bill took flight , so i would briefly like to share her story . rocky was two years old when his parents noticed that he was developing a little differently . it was when he started school aged four that it became clear that mainstream education was not the right fit and that those teaching him were not trained to teach children with neurodiverse conditions . that situation was very distressing for him and for hayley , who had to fight to be heard . she went to tribunal and spent many hours putting together all the necessary paperwork to show that rocky needed to be placed in specialist education . it was an unnecessary distraction that took hayley away from being the mum she needed to be for both her children , which made everyday family life harder . rocky is just one of thousands of children whose parents are fighting today for their children to have an adequate education . indeed , the government ’s own send statistics show that 98 % of parents win on appeal once they get to tribunal . those children are not difficult or troublesome . hayley said something very poignant : “ autistic children , whilst in mainstream schools , are easily misunderstood . they are just innocent children trying to survive in an environment that is n’t designed for them . they have to fail first before they are adequately supported and that ’s not how a child should start their education . ” rocky ’s story was eventually a success story , but it is his story , along with other conversations i have had , that led me to introduce the bill today . it is important to impress on all members of the house that autistic children will not grow out of it : they will need extra help and targeted treatment to reduce the chance of negative consequences and financial burdens in later life . however , as it stands , just 39 % of primary school teachers have more than half a day ’s training in autism — such a small number . for secondary school , that figure drops to just 14 % . send is seen as a specialist area — a bolt - on , not a built - in — with teacher training not including how to ensure that teachers can identify send markers . that needs to change . autistic pupils routinely identify autism training for teachers as the single biggest change that would improve their experience of school . that can only happen if all teachers are trained in send . it is for those reasons that i introduce my ten - minute rule bill , the autism ( early identification ) bill , which will deliver support to increase autism assessment , reduce diagnosis waiting times and introduce mandatory autism training for all teachers . the bill will provide a solid base through which all teachers will learn about early identification , the special educational needs code of practice , the pattern and sequence of child development , what needs to be done if a child has communication difficulties , and understanding and dealing with difficult behaviour . it will mean that if milestones are not met , help can be put in place ; that fewer children will struggle in school ; and that they will no longer be labelled difficult or disruptive . through a bill that ensures that all teaching staff can support autistic pupils well , schools will in turn become more inclusive places , where everyone — staff , pupils and parents — is truly valued and feels a sense of belonging . i am encouraged by the openness of this government to changes in the system . it is positive that the government announced as far back as the last queen ’s speech that every child will get the education they deserve , and that there is vision , ethos and strategic direction in our education system . i am also encouraged by the publication of the send and alternative provision improvement plan , in which the government stated that they “ will explore opportunities to build teacher expertise through a review of the initial teacher training ( itt ) core content framework and early career framework . ” i was encouraged by the secretary of state ’s comments at the dispatch box yesterday , and by a letter from the minister last july that said that “ all initial teacher training courses must be designed so that trainee teachers can demonstrate a clear understanding of the needs of all pupils , including those with send ” and that “ all teachers are teachers of send ” . all those objectives are encapsulated in the bill , but it would go further . having a special educational needs co - ordinator in school is not enough , and only having a few providers of training is not enough . the bill will ensure that all autistic children receive the support they need so that they can flourish , and that autistic and send pupils are not a forgotten piece of the puzzle , but an integral part of the education system . it will help the government achieve their objectives in this area . the bill is supported by the sector , which is keen to work with the government on the finer detail regarding what training is needed and how it should be rolled out , as well as to work on technologies to make the system around education , health and care plans a lot easier and ensure that support can be easily reviewed so that it continues to suit the young person ’s needs . as i wrap up , i ask the under - secretary of state for education , my hon . friend question put and agreed to . ordered , that duncan baker , sir robert buckland , dame caroline dinenage , sir liam fox , mr robin walker , edward timpson , jim shannon , marion fellows , peter gibson , james sunderland , elliot colburn and steve tuckwell present the bill . duncan baker accordingly presented the bill . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on consideration of bill , as amended in public bill committee [ relevant documents : thirteenth report of the culture , media and sport committee of session 2022 - 23 , draft media bill : final report , hc 1807 , and the government response , session 2023 - 24 , hc 115 ; twelfth report of the culture , media and sport committee of session 2022 - 23 , draft media bill : radio measures , hc 1287 , and the government response , session 2023 - 24 , hc 115 ; fifth report of the welsh affairs committee of session 2022 - 23 , broadcasting in wales , hc 620 , and the government response , session 2023 - 24 , hc 489 . ] we were going to begin with new clause 1 , but hywel williams is not here , so i instead call george eustice to move new clause 3 . “ ( 1 ) within six months of the passage of this act , the secretary of state must publish a call for evidence seeking views on alternative incentives to encourage publishers or regulators to seek recognition under the terms of the royal charter for the self - regulation of the press . ( 2 ) the secretary of state must lay before both houses of parliament a report setting out the government ’s formal response to evidence submitted in response to the call for evidence required by subsection ( 1 ) . ( 3 ) the secretary of state may not make an order under section 55(3)(ga ) bringing any part of section 50 into force until the report specified in subsection ( 2 ) has been laid before both houses of parliament . ”—(george eustice . ) see explanatory statement to amendment 3 . brought up , and read the first time . i beg to move , that the clause be read a second time . with this it will be convenient to discuss the following : new clause 1 — evaluation of nations - based production — “ ( 1 ) the communications act 2003 is amended as follows . ( 2 ) in section 286 ( regional programme - making for channels 3 and 5 ) — ( a ) in subsection ( 1)(d ) , at end insert “ except where the company is a new start - up and has registered itself as being primarily based in that nation ” ; ( b ) after subsection ( 1)(d ) insert — “ ( e ) ofcom must require a broadcaster listing a production as being based in northern ireland , scotland or wales to demonstrate prior to production that a production company has — ( i ) a substantial base ( consisting of a specified number of staff ) within the nation ; ( ii ) a commitment to remain within the nation for a specified amount of time ; ( iii ) had a presence within the nation for at least 36 months . ” ; ( c ) in subsection ( 3)(d ) , at end insert “ except where the company is a new start - up and has registered itself as being primarily based in that nation . ” ; ( d ) after subsection ( 3)(d ) insert — “ ( e ) ofcom must require a broadcaster listing a production as being based in northern ireland , scotland or wales to demonstrate prior to production that a production company has — ( i ) a substantial base ( consisting of a specified number of staff ) within the nation ; ( ii ) a commitment to remain within the nation for a specified amount of time ; ( iii ) had a presence within the nation for at least 36 months . ” ( 3 ) in section 288 ( regional programme - making for channel 4 ) — ( a ) in subsection ( 1)(d ) , at end insert “ except where the company is a new start - up and has registered itself as being primarily based in that nation . ” ; ( b ) after subsection ( 1)(d ) insert — “ ( e ) ofcom must require a broadcaster listing a production as being based in northern ireland , scotland or wales to demonstrate prior to production that a production company has — ( i ) a substantial base ( consisting of a specified number of staff ) within the nation ; ( ii ) a commitment to remain within the nation for a specified amount of time ; ( iii ) had a presence within the nation specified for at least 36 months . ” . ” new clause 4 — ofcom review of on - demand programme service regulation measures — “ ( 1 ) as soon as practicable after chapter 2 of this act comes into force , ofcom must carry out a review of its on - demand programme service regulation measures . ( 2 ) this review must take account of — ( a ) the size , and ( b ) the turnover of the services to which these regulations apply and assess whether the current application of the regulations is the most effective means to achieve the policy goals of this chapter . ( 3 ) in conducting the review described in subsection ( 2 ) , ofcom must consult with relevant stakeholders , including public service broadcasters , on - demand programme service providers and any other stakeholders as appropriate . ” this would require ofcom to conduct a review of the bill ’s new on - demand regulatory code . the review must take account of the sizes and turnovers of the regulated services , and assess whether the current regulatory approach is effective in achieving the policy goals of the bill . the review would have to be conducted in consultation with relevant stakeholders . new clause 6 — age rating standards — “ where tier 1 providers use an age rating or other classification system to comply with the duties imposed on them by or under this act for the protection of audiences from harm , they must — ( a ) apply the age rating or classification system used by the video works authority based on their classification guidelines ; or ( b ) apply an age rating or classification system that is judged by ofcom to be — ( i ) based on a transparent set of appropriate standards ; ( ii ) applied consistently across content ; and ( iii ) informed by regular consultation with the uk public . ” this new clause ensures that , where age ratings are used by video on demand platforms , those ratings are the same as the ones used by the british board of film classification or meet equivalent standards of rigour , transparency , and objectivity . new clause 7 — adequate on - demand coverage to be available — “ after section 101 of the broadcasting act 1996 , insert — “ 101za provision of adequate on - demand coverage ( 1 ) the purpose of this section is to secure , in relation to a listed event , that if any person makes available on - demand coverage of the whole or any part of that event , adequate on - demand coverage is made available widely and free of charge to members of the public in the united kingdom , whether by that person or another person . ( 2 ) in this part , in relation to a listed event or part of such an event , “ on - demand coverage ” means audiovisual content consisting of coverage of , or excerpts from , that event ( or a combination of those ) , where — ( a ) a person makes a range of such content available to members of the public , whether through a relevant service or otherwise ; ( b ) selections from that range can be made by the user and viewed at a time chosen by the user ( even if it may be viewed only within a period specified by the person making it available ) ; ( c ) the selected content is received by the user by means of the internet ; and ( d ) the content otherwise meets any criteria or requirements specified ( either generally or in relation to particular listed events ) by regulations under section 104za ; and “ on - demand rights ” means rights to make on - demand coverage available for access by members of the public in the united kingdom . ( 3 ) any contract entered into on or after the day on which section [ adequate on - demand coverage to be available ] of the media act 2024 comes into force under which a person acquires on - demand rights is void so far as it purports — ( a ) in relation to the whole or any part of the event , or ( b ) in relation to access by means of the internet , in the united kingdom , to grant those rights exclusively . ( 4 ) for the purposes of this section , on - demand rights are granted exclusively if the person granting them — ( a ) has not granted any such right in respect of the whole or , as the case may be , that part of the event to more than one person , and ( b ) is precluded by the terms of the contract from doing so . ( 5 ) for the purposes of subsection ( 4)(a ) , rights are not to be treated as having been granted to more than one person where the only persons to whom such rights have been granted are connected with each other . ( 6 ) no person may provide on - demand coverage of a listed event unless authorised to do so under subsection ( 7 ) , ( 8) or ( 9 ) , even if that person is authorised to include live coverage of that event in a relevant service by subsection ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) or ( 4 ) of section 101 . ( 7 ) the provision of on - demand coverage of a listed event is authorised by this subsection if — ( a ) on - demand rights have been acquired by the provider of a relevant service falling within section 98(1)(a ) ; ( b ) that relevant service includes live coverage of that event ; and ( c ) the on - demand coverage provided that provider — ( i ) constitutes adequate on - demand coverage of the event , and ( ii ) may be accessed free of charge . ( 8) the provision of on - demand coverage of a listed event is authorised by this subsection if — ( a ) on - demand rights have been acquired by one or more persons ; ( b ) those persons are not connected with each other ; ( c ) the on - demand coverage provided by at least one of those persons — ( i ) constitutes adequate on - demand coverage of the event , and ( ii ) may be accessed free of charge ; and ( d ) the person or persons who have acquired rights to provide the adequate on - demand coverage satisfy the requirements in relation to that coverage of any regulations made under section 104za for the purposes of this paragraph . ( 9 ) the provision of on - demand coverage of a listed event is authorised by this subsection if ofcom have consented in advance to such provision . ( 10 ) ofcom may revoke any consent given by them under subsection ( 9 ) . ( 11 ) the code drawn up by ofcom under section 104 shall include guidance on the matters which they will take into account in determining whether to give or revoke their consent for the purposes of subsection ( 9 ) . ( 12 ) regulations under section 104za ( regulations about coverage of listed events ) may include provision — ( a ) specifying ( either generally or in relation to particular listed events ) any criteria or requirements that content must meet in order to be regarded as on - demand coverage for the purposes of subsection ( 2)(d ) ; ( b ) for determining for the purposes of this section what ( whether generally or in relation to particular circumstances ) is to be taken to represent the provision of adequate on - demand coverage of an event for the purposes of subsection ( 8)(d ) . ( 13 ) failure to comply with subsection ( 6 ) shall not affect the validity of any contract . ( 14 ) subsection ( 6 ) shall not have effect where the person providing the on - demand coverage is exercising on - demand rights acquired before the commencement of this section . ( 15 ) in this section , “ on - demand coverage ” and “ adequate on - demand coverage ” are to be construed in accordance with regulations under section 104za . ( 16 ) for the purposes of sections 104a ( provision of information ) and 104b ( penalties for failure to provide information ) , any person making available , or wishing to make available , on - demand coverage of the whole or any part of any listed event shall be treated as a person who is within subsection ( 5 ) of section 104a. ” ” this new clause would secure that , where possible , adequate on - demand coverage of listed events , such as clips and excerpts , is made available free of charge to audiences in the united kingdom . new clause 8 — protection of digital terrestrial television — “ ( 1 ) the secretary of state shall ensure that — ( a ) the licensed public service channels continue to be broadcast via digital terrestrial television to as many of their intended audience as is reasonably practicable ; and ( b ) a sufficient number of digital terrestrial television multiplex licences are issued to deliver the licensed public service channels via digital terrestrial television and support a diverse range of commercial digital terrestrial television channels . ( 2 ) ofcom shall reserve sufficient frequencies for television broadcasting services accordingly . ” this new clause would place a responsibility on the secretary of state to ensure that public service television channels continue to be broadcast via digital terrestrial television ( dtt ) and that sufficient licences are issued to keep the platform viable . it would also require ofcom to make spectrum available accordingly . new clause 9 — review of children ’s access to public service broadcast content — “ within six months of the passage of this act , the secretary of state must prepare and publish a report on how to ensure that children have access to public service broadcast content . ” this new clause would require a review of how to ensure children have access to public service content , given their viewing habits . new clause 10 — digital rights to listed events — “ ( 1 ) the secretary of state may by regulations amend the broadcasting act 1996 to make provision for coverage of listed events which is not live coverage . ( 2 ) a statutory instrument containing regulations under this section may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each house of parliament . ” new clause 11 — delivery of public service content on relevant television services — “ after section 264a of the communications act 2003 , insert — “ 264b delivery of public service content on relevant television services ( 1 ) ofcom must monitor the extent to which the public service remit for television in the united kingdom is met in respect of relevant television services . ( 2 ) if ofcom considers that the public service remit for television in the united kingdom is not being met in respect of such services , it may set whatever programming quotas it considers necessary to ensure that the remit is met . ( 3 ) for the purposes of this section , “ relevant television services ” means — ( a ) the television broadcasting services provided by the bbc ; ( b ) the television programme services that are public services of the welsh authority ( within the meaning of section 207 ) ; ( c ) every channel 3 service ; ( d ) channel 4 ; ( e ) channel 5 . ” ” this new clause would give ofcom powers to measure the delivery of public service content on the linear services of the public service broadcasters , and set quotas if it considered the current level to be unsatisfactory . new clause 12 — regulation of selection services for on demand and online - only content — “ ( 1 ) within three months of the passage of this act , the secretary of state must by regulations provide for the regulation of selection services for on demand and online - only content equivalent to the regulation of radio selection services provided for by section 48 and schedule 9 of this act . ( 2 ) regulations under subsection ( 1 ) may amend primary legislation . ” new clause 13 — gaelic language service — “ the secretary of state must , within six months of the passage of this act , review whether a gaelic language service should be given a public service broadcast remit . ” new clause 14 — age classifications — “ when considering the adequacy of age ratings , ofcom must assess whether any age ratings used by providers are — ( a ) widely recognised by the uk public ; ( b ) underpinned by a transparent set of standards ; ( c ) informed by regular consultation with the uk public . ” new clause 15 — establishing a broadcasting and communications authority for wales — “ ( 1 ) a broadcasting and communications authority for wales ( “ the authority ” ) is established . ( 2 ) the authority must perform the following functions — ( a ) support for the broadcasting and media sectors serving audiences in wales ; ( b ) oversight and accountability for public service broadcasting in wales ; ( c ) facilitation and development of the production of content by broadcaster and media outlets in wales ; ( d ) promotion and preservation of the welsh language , identity and culture in broadcasting and media output ; ( e ) support for and development of english language content made in wales and ensuring that it is relevant to welsh audiences ; and ( f ) any functions the secretary of state considers necessary to support further devolution of broadcasting policy to the welsh government . ( 3 ) in performing the functions under subsection 2 the authority must have regard to — ( a ) public interest journalism ; ( b ) content for children and young people ; and ( c ) sport content and national events . ( 4 ) in performing the duties under subsection ( 2 ) in relation to broadcasting and media matters in wales , the authority must consult — ( a ) relevant ministers in the welsh government ; ( b ) members of the senedd ; and ( c ) members of the public living in wales . ( 5 ) section 1 comes into force at the end of the period of 12 months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 6 ) in preparation for the establishment of the authority a shadow authority may be established in line with the functions set out in subsection 2 after the passing of this act . ( 7 ) the secretary of state must by regulations make provision for the appointment of officers to the authority . ” this new clause creates a new independent welsh broadcasting and communications authority with responsibility and oversight for broadcasting and media matters in wales to help reflect and meet the needs of welsh audiences . new clause 16 — listed events — “ ( 1 ) the broadcasting act 1996 is amended as follows . ( 2 ) in section 97 ( as amended by section 299 of the communications act 2003 ) , after subsection ( 1b ) insert — “ ( 1a ) the following events must be included in group a of the list drawn up under subsection ( 1 ) — ( a ) the olympic games ; ( b ) the paralympic games ; ( c ) the fifa world cup finals tournament ; ( d ) the fifa women ’s world cup finals tournament ; ( e ) the european football championship finals tournament ; ( f ) the european women ’s football championship finals tournament ; ( g ) the fa cup final ; ( h ) the scottish fa cup final ; ( i ) the grand national ; ( j ) the wimbledon tennis finals ; ( k ) the rugby union world cup final ; ( l ) six nations rugby tournament matches involving home countries ; ( m ) the derby ; ( n ) the rugby league challenge cup final ; ( o ) any match involving the national teams of scotland , wales , northern ireland or england pertaining to qualification for the events listed in paragraphs ( c ) , ( d ) , ( e ) and ( f ) . ” ” this new clause would make it compulsory for the secretary of state to place the list of sporting events in group a of listed sporting events , ensuring they are available on free to air television in their entirety . the events consist of all current group a events plus the home nations world cup and euro qualifiers . new clause 17 — consultation on listing of events — “ ( 1 ) the broadcasting act 1996 is amended as follows . ( 2 ) in section 97(2 ) , after paragraph ( b ) , insert — “ ( ba ) seirbheis nam meadhanan gàidhlig ( the gaelic media service ) , ” ( 3 ) in section 104(4 ) , after paragraph ( b ) , insert — “ ( ba ) seirbheis nam meadhanan gàidhlig ( the gaelic media service ) , ” ” this new clause would add seirbheis nam meadhanan gàidhlig ( the gaelic media service ) to the list of organisations which must be consulted when the secretary of state is drafting or amending listed events and ofcom is drawing up its related code of guidance . new clause 18 — listed events fund — “ ( 1 ) the broadcasting act 1996 is amended as follows . ( 2 ) after section 104za insert — “ 104zb financial matters arising from the listing of events : the listed events fund ( 1 ) the secretary of state shall establish a fund ( the “ listed events fund ” ) with the purpose of minimising the consequential financial impact of the listing of events on sporting governing bodies who would otherwise suffer egregious financial distress . ( 2 ) payments from the fund shall be limited to governing bodies and other sporting rights holders who maintain their registered office in scotland , wales , northern ireland or england and whose primary geographic area of responsibility lies within one of these territories . ( 3 ) the secretary of state , following the revision of the listing of events in group a , shall invite governing bodies and other organisations who could reasonably assess their turnover or income as dropping as a result of an event being listed in group a ( and who qualify under the provisions of subsection ( 2 ) of this section ) to apply to him for payment from the fund . ( 4 ) no organisation with a reported turnover of greater than £ 50 million per annum for the financial year in which any subvention may be paid shall be entitled to payment from the fund . ( 5 ) the amount laid down in subsection ( 4 ) may be varied by the secretary of state on an annual basis , but may not increase by a rate greater than that of the retail price index as measured at any point in the three months previous to any proposed variation . ” ” this new clause would provide a fund under the auspices of the secretary of state to be paid to governing bodies or other broadcasting rights holders who may experience financial detriment as a result of listing under group a. new clause 19 — diversity in the workforce of the public service broadcasters — “ ( 1 ) ofcom must produce a report each year detailing diversity in the workforce of the public sector broadcasters ( “ psbs ” ) . ( 2 ) the report under subsection ( 1 ) must include — ( a ) a breakdown by protected characteristic of the numbers of people in the workforce of each psb ; ( b ) the percentage of the workforce on and offscreen who have various protected characteristics as deemed relevant by ofcom ; ( c ) if the percentages reported under paragraph ( b ) are not reflective of the population as a whole or on a regional basis , a statement from each broadcaster on how they intend to increase diversity in their organisation . ( 3 ) ofcom may request any information they require from the psbs in order to compile the report under subsection ( 1 ) . ( 4 ) provision of data to enable ofcom to produce the report under subsection ( 1 ) is to be considered by ofcom when it assesses the extent to which a psb has fulfilled its public service broadcasting remit . ” this new clause would require ofcom to produce an annual report on workforce diversity within the psbs . new clause 20 — on - demand programme services — “ ( 1 ) ofcom must report to the secretary of state each year on the percentage of people who are watching on - demand services that do not fall under the definition of on - demand programme services in section 368a of the communications act . ( 2 ) if ofcom reports concern that the definition is not providing protection for public service broadcasters on on - demand services that are being widely accessed by the public — ( a ) ofcom must write to the secretary of state , and ( b ) the secretary of state must make a written statement to parliament on how the secretary of state intends to remedy this matter . ” this new clause would require ofcom and the secretary of state to keep under review the adequacy of the definition of on - demand programme services in section 368a of the communications act 2003 . new clause 21 — delivery of public service content on relevant television services — “ after section 264a of the communications act 2003 , insert — “ 264b delivery of public service content on relevant television services ( 1 ) ofcom must monitor the extent to which the public service remit for television in the united kingdom is met in respect of relevant television services , including level of programming from a diverse range of genres including , among others , education , entertainment , music , arts science , sports matters of international significance , religion and specialist interests . ( 2 ) if ofcom considers that the public service remit for television in the united kingdom is not being met in respect of such services , it may set whatever programming quotas it considers necessary to ensure that the remit is met . ( 3 ) it is the duty of relevant television broadcasting services to prepare and publish a statement annually on their performance in the provision of public service content . ( 4 ) for the purposes of this section , “ relevant television services ” means — ( a ) the television broadcasting services provided by the bbc ; ( b ) the television programme services that are public services of the welsh authority ( within the meaning of section 207 ) ; ( c ) every channel 3 service ; ( d ) channel 4 ; ( e ) channel 5 . ” ” this new clause would give ofcom powers to measure the delivery of public service content on the linear services of the public service broadcasters , and set quotas if it considered the current level to be unsatisfactory . new clause 22 — duty to report on workforce diversity and equality requirement — “ ( 1 ) public service broadcasters ( “ psbs ” ) must prepare and publish a statement on a workforce diversity and equality strategy within the period of one year beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 2 ) a workforce diversity and equality strategy must comprise a plan setting out how psbs are taking appropriate steps towards improving diversity and equality within the workforce in the period covered by the plan , which must cover not more than three years . ( 3 ) in particular , a workforce diversity and equality strategy must state a psb ’s objectives and priorities for the period it covers . ( 4 ) a workforce diversity and equality strategy must include a summary and an evaluation of the activities and initiatives pursued or commissioned by a psb in the exercise of its functions under subsection ( 1 ) in the period to which the strategy relates . ( 5 ) before the end of the period covered by a workforce diversity and equality strategy , psbs must prepare and publish a strategy for a further period , ensuring that each successive strategy covers a period beginning immediately after the end of the last one . ( 6 ) in preparing or revising a workforce diversity and equality strategy , a psb must consult such persons as they consider appropriate . ( 7 ) ofcom must prepare and publish a report on workforce diversity and equality strategy statements produced by psbs set out in subsection ( 1 ) , in particular — ( a ) summarising what actions a psb is planning and taking in the exercise of its strategy under subsections ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) ; ( b ) assessing what progress has been made towards achieving the objectives and priorities set out in a strategy in the relevant period . ( 8) the first annual report by ofcom on workforce diversity and equality is required to be published within a period of 18 months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 9 ) ofcom must prepare and publish subsequent reports on psbs ’ strategies and progress against them every three years thereafter . ” this new clause introduces a requirement for psbs to publish objectives on the promotion of diversity and equality among the workforce and for ofcom to monitor and report on psb performance on meeting this requirement . new clause 23 — duty to report on media literacy requirement — “ ( 1 ) public service broadcasters ( “ psbs ” ) must prepare and publish a statement on a media literacy strategy within the period of one year beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 2 ) a media literacy strategy is a plan setting out how psbs are taking appropriate steps towards improving levels of media literacy among audiences in the period covered by the plan , which must be not more than three years . ( 3 ) in particular , a media literacy strategy must state a psb ’s objectives and priorities for the period it covers . ( 4 ) a media literacy statement must include a summary and an evaluation of the activities and initiatives pursued or commissioned by the psb in the exercise of their functions under section ( 1 ) in the period to which the report relates . ( 5 ) before the end of the period covered by a media literacy strategy , psbs must prepare and publish a strategy for a further period , ensuring that each successive strategy covers a period beginning immediately after the end of the last one . ( 6 ) in preparing or revising a media literacy strategy , a psb must consult such persons as they consider appropriate . ( 7 ) ofcom must prepare and publish a report of the media literacy strategy statements set out in subsection ( 1 ) , in particular — ( a ) summarising what actions a psb is planning and taking in the exercise of its strategy under subsections ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) ; ( b ) assessing what progress has been made towards achieving the objectives and priorities set out in a strategy in the relevant period . ( 8) the first annual report by ofcom on media literacy is required to be published within a period of 18 months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 9 ) ofcom must prepare and publish subsequent report on psbs ’ strategies and progress against them every three years thereafter . ” this new clause introduces a requirement for psbs to take appropriate steps in relation to improving levels of media literacy among their audiences and for ofcom to monitor and report on psb performance on meeting this requirement . new clause 24 — duty to report on viewer and listener consultation requirements — “ ( 1 ) public service broadcasters ( “ psbs ” ) must prepare and publish a viewer and listener consultation strategy ( “ consultation strategy ” ) within the period of one year beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 2 ) a consultation strategy is a plan setting out how psbs are taking appropriate steps towards improving levels of engagement with audiences in the period covered by the plan , which must be not more than three years . ( 3 ) in particular , a consultation strategy must state a psb ’s objectives and priorities for the period it covers . ( 4 ) a consultation strategy must include a summary and an evaluation of the activities and initiatives pursued or commissioned by the psb in the exercise of their functions under section ( 1 ) in the period to which the report relates . ( 5 ) before the end of the period covered by an audience consultation strategy , psbs must prepare and publish a strategy for a further period , ensuring that each successive strategy covers a period beginning immediately after the end of the last one . ( 6 ) in preparing or revising a media literacy consultation strategy , psbs must consult such persons as they consider appropriate . ( 7 ) ofcom must prepare and publish a report assessing psbs ’ consultation strategies , in particular — ( a ) summarising what actions a psb is planning and taking in the exercise of its strategy , and ( b ) assessing what progress has been made towards achieving the objectives and priorities set out in a strategy in the relevant period . ( 8) the first annual report by ofcom on psbs ’ consultation strategies must be published within a period of 18 months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ( 9 ) ofcom must prepare and publish subsequent reports on psbs ’ strategies and progress against them every three years thereafter . ” this new clause introduces a requirement for psbs to produce a strategy and objectives for increasing levels of consultation with user listeners and for ofcom to monitor and report on psb performance on meeting this requirement . amendment 81 , in clause 1 , page 2 , line 38 , at end insert — “ ( iii ) a sufficient quantity of audiovisual content so as to permit fulfilment of the public service remit for television in the gaelic language as spoken in scotland ” . this amendment would require ofcom to report on whether a sufficient quantity of audiovisual content in gaelic is televised to meet the public service remit for television . amendment 1 , page 3 , line 10 , at end insert — “ ( 5a ) in assessing the extent to which the requirements of subsection ( 5)(b)(i ) have been met ofcom must have particular regard to the importance of content recognising the culture and heritage of those parts of the united kingdom recognised under the council of europe framework convention for the protection of national minorities . ” this amendment requires ofcom to have regard to the council of europe ’s framework convention for the protection of national minorities when reporting on the fulfilment of the public service remit through audiovisual content by the public service broadcasters . amendment 86 , page 3 , line 13 , leave out from “ appropriate ” to end and insert — “ level of programming from a diverse range of genres including , among others , education , entertainment , music , arts science , sports matters of international significance , religion and specialist interests . ” this amendment would add detailed description of the range of genres which ofcom must report on whether the public service broadcasters have made available . government amendment 19 . amendment 79 , in clause 3 , page 7 , line 15 , at end insert — “ ( c ) which is broadcast via uhf frequencies that can be received by a minimum of 98.5 % of the population of the united kingdom . ” this amendment amends the definition of public service for channel 3 and channel 5 to include an obligation to broadcast via digital terrestrial television , on the basis of the already existing licence requirements applying to psb dtt multiplexes . amendment 80 , page 7 , line 32 , at end insert — “ ( d ) which is broadcast via uhf frequencies that can be received by a minimum of 98.5 % of the population of the united kingdom . ” this amendments amends the definition of public service for channel 4 to include a obligation to broadcast via digital terrestrial television , on the basis of the already existing licence requirements applying to psb dtt multiplexes . amendment 82 , in clause 8 , page 9 , line 29 , at end insert — “ ( c ) a duration such as ofcom considers appropriate of those independent productions are commissioned from smaller studios ” . this amendment would require ofcom to require licensed public service channel regulatory conditions to include commissioning from smaller studios . amendment 83 , page 9 , line 29 , at end insert — “ ( 1a ) the regulatory regime for channel 4 includes the conditions that ofcom consider appropriate for securing that , in each year , not less than 35 % per cent of channel 4 's total expenditure on qualifying audiovisual content is allocated to independent productions made by independent production companies with annual turnover not exceeding £ 25,000,000 . ( 1b ) the secretary of state may by regulations amend subsection ( 1a ) by substituting a different figure for the annual turnover specified in that section . ( 1c ) before making regulations under subsection ( 1b ) , the secretary of state must consult — ( a ) ofcom , ( b ) channel 4 , and ( c ) independent production companies that are likely to be affected by the regulations . ” this amendment would require that at least 35 % of channel 4 ’s annual expenditure on qualifying audiovisual content be allocated to productions made by independent producers with annual revenues smaller than £ 25 m. it also provides the secretary of state the power to amend , following consultation , the revenue figure defining the production companies to which the requirement applies . amendment 84 , page 10 , line 15 , before “ commissioning ” insert “ “ annual revenue ” means the reported revenues published in the annual accounts of the respective independent production company , covering the most recently available period of 12 months ; ” . this amendment would insert a definition for the purposes of amendment 83 . amendment 85 , page 10 , line 17 , at end insert — “ “ independent production companies ” has the same meaning as in the broadcasting ( independent productions ) order 1991 ; ” . this amendment would insert a definition for the purposes of amendment 83 . government amendments 20 to 40 . amendment 88 , in clause 25 , page 30 , line 30 , at end insert — “ ( 4 ) on the date on which section 21 comes into force , the secretary of state must revise the list maintained for the purposes of part 4 of the broadcasting act 1996 so that it includes — ( a ) at least one cricket test match each year between the months of may and september ; ( b ) at least one cricket one day international match each year between the months of may and september ; ( c ) all other currently listed group a events . ( 5 ) the events listed under subsection ( 4 ) must be allocated to group a. ” amendment 5 , in clause 28 , page 41 , line 10 , leave out “ an appropriate ” and insert “ a significant ” . this would require that designated internet programme services are given significant prominence within regulated television selection services . amendment 78 , page 42 , line 3 , at end insert — “ ( f ) any local digital television programme service that ofcom determines is willing and able to offer an internet programme service . ” this amendment includes local digital television services within the prominence framework for designated internet programme services where ofcom determines a service is willing and able to offer such a service . amendment 87 , page 42 , line 21 , leave out “ an appropriate ” and insert “ a significant ” . this amendment would require a provider of regulated television selection to give significant prominence to designated internet programme services . government amendments 41 to 49 . amendment 6 , page 69 , line 1 , leave out clause 31 . this would retain section 295 of the communications act 2003 , which restricts c4c ’s involvement in programme - making . government amendments 50 and 51 . amendment 18 , in clause 38 , page 79 , line 25 , at end insert — “ ( 4a ) when considering the adequacy of age ratings , ofcom must report on the extent to which any age ratings used by providers are — ( a ) clear and well understood by consumers ; ( b ) underpinned by a published and transparent set of standards ; and ( c ) informed by regular and substantive consultation with the uk public . ” this amendment sets conditions to be used by ofcom when reporting on the adequacy of the age ratings classification systems used by providers . government amendment 52 . amendment 7 , in clause 44 , page 83 , line 36 , leave out subsection ( 3 ) . this amendment and amendments 8 to 13 would broaden the scope of the requirements placed by the bill on local radio broadcasting licences , so that the current scope of local material as news , information and other spoken material is retained . amendment 8 , page 84 , line 6 , leave out “ news and information ” and insert “ news , information and other spoken material and music ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 7 . amendment 9 , page 84 , line 23 , leave out “ news and information ” and insert “ news , information and other spoken material and music ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 7 . amendment 10 , page 84 , line 24 , leave out “ news and information ” and insert “ news , information and other spoken material and music ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 7 . amendment 11 , in page 84 , line 26 , after “ news ” insert “ , information and other spoken material and music ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 7 . amendment 12 , page 84 , line 34 , after “ news ” insert “ , information and other spoken material and music ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 7 . amendment 13 , page 84 , line 36 , after “ news ” insert “ , information and other spoken material and music ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 7 . government amendments 53 to 59 . amendment 2 , in clause 50 , page 114 , line 7 , leave out subsections ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) and insert — “ ( 2 ) section 40(3 ) of the crime and courts act 2013 is omitted . ” this amendment would allow the secretary of state the option in future of commencing subsection 2 of section 40 of the crime and courts acts 2013 . amendment 3 , in clause 55 , page 115 , line 25 , leave out “ 50 ” and insert “ ( consultation on section 50 ) ” . this amendment , together with amendment 4 and nc3 , would require the secretary of state to consult on alternative incentives to encourage publishers or regulators to seek recognition under the terms of the royal charter for the self - regulation of the press , and to lay a report on the consultation before parliament , before section 50 could be commenced . amendment 4 , page 115 , line 35 , at end insert — “ ( ga ) section 50 ( but see section ( consultation on section 50 ) ) ; ” . see explanatory statement to amendment 3 . government amendments 60 to 74 . amendment 17 , in schedule 5 , page 145 , line 4 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) persons designated by the secretary of state as the responsible authority under section 4(1 ) of the video recordings act 1984 ; ” . this amendment ensures that the british board of film classification is consulted by ofcom when drawing up the video on demand codes . government amendment 75 . amendment 14 , page 146 , line 34 , leave out “ 40 per cent ” and insert “ 80 per cent ” . this would require tier 1 on - demand services to provide subtitling for 80 % of their on - demand tv content from the second anniversary of the publication of the accessibility code . amendment 15 , page 146 , line 36 , leave out “ 5 per cent ” and insert “ 10 per cent ” . this would require tier 1 on - demand services to provide audio - description for 10 per cent of their on - demand tv content from the second anniversary of the publication of the accessibility code . amendment 16 , page 147 , line 1 , leave out “ 2.5 per cent ” and insert “ 5 per cent ” . this would require tier 1 on - demand services to provide sign language presentation or translation for 5 per cent of their on - demand tv content from the second anniversary of the publication of the accessibility code . government amendments 76 and 77 . there are a number of new clauses and amendments in my name that i wish to speak to , but principally among them i will speak to amendment 2 , which relates to the repeal of section 40 of the crime and courts acts 2013 . with the will of the house , i will press the amendment to a division later today , but first i will briefly address some of the other amendments . amendment 1 is not actually linked to the debate about section 40 , or indeed the leveson inquiry ; it is about something very different . it simply states that ofcom , when considering and assessing the public service remit , should also have regard to the framework convention on national minorities . that is because the current framework acknowledges the importance of languages in this country and their recognition under the framework convention on minority languages , but it omits the framework convention on national minorities . that is of particular importance to places such as cornwall , scotland and wales , where the culture and identity goes beyond just language . i hope the government will consider addressing this matter in the other place as the bill progresses . new clause 3 addresses the simple reality that although the government have said that they intend to repeal section 40 of the crime and courts act , ministers have confirmed to me that the government remain committed to the continued existence of the royal charter on self - regulation of the press . that royal charter was established by david cameron when he was prime minister , in response to the recommendations of the leveson inquiry . conservative members voted to put in place section 40 in order to create an incentive to join the royal charter . given that the government have said that they want to repeal section 40 , which created that incentive , but that they remain absolutely committed to keeping the royal charter , surely they should at the very least have a call for evidence to examine what other possible incentives might encourage publishers to join that royal charter . if the government did not believe in the royal charter on self - regulation of the press , they would simply bring forward orders in council to disband the royal charter , as is provided for under article 10 of the charter . the government do not want to do that , so if they remain committed to the royal charter , let us at least explore those options . they could include giving publishers access to arbitration so that they can get a fairer share of the advertising revenue for the news content they produce . that remains an open problem ; some government legislation seeks to address it , but it could go further . i wish to focus principally on amendment 2 , since that is the one i intend to press to a division . the amendment would simply put in place a more precise cut to deliver the government ’s objectives . section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 had two parts . the first part — subsection ( 2)—created an incentive for publishers to join because it gave them protection against those with deep pockets . there was a carrot and a stick in section 40 . the carrot was that if , for the sake of argument , a russian oligarch threatened a publisher and said , “ we ’re going to get carter - ruck to write expensive letters to you . we will see you in court if you publish this , ” that publisher would have had protection because they would have been able to say to the rich and powerful , “ we have confidence in our story and are going to run it , and if you do n’t like the story , we will see you in arbitration ; we wo n’t see you in court . if you insist on taking us to court and bypassing that arbitration , you will pay the publisher ’s costs as well as your own . ” that was the carrot — the bit that the press never objected to . no one ever raised an objection to that . but there was also a stick — subsection ( 3 ) of section 40 . the stick basically said that publishers who do not join a recognised regulator have more cost exposure to ordinary citizens who have had their lives and privacy violated and have no redress other than to bring legal action . the press never objected to the carrot ; they only ever objected to the stick . because they are a glass - half - empty type of industry , they of course tended to focus on the bit they did not like rather than the bit they did like , and they lobbied furiously to have that part of section 40 removed . then we come to the 2017 conservative manifesto — let us be honest : it was not the best manifesto the party has ever drafted . probably due to a drafting error , that manifesto pledged not just to remove subsection ( 3 ) of subsection 40 , which was all that was required and which would have delivered the spirit of that manifesto commitment , but committed to remove the entirety of section 40 , which was completely unnecessary . amendment 2 would remove the stick but retain the carrot . it would remove subsection ( 3 ) of section 40 . in that , it would deliver everything the press have ever wanted , and therefore also satisfy the government ’s intentions . this is a point that i have often made . the hon . gentleman ’s “ carrot ” , as he calls it , seems very similar to anti - slapp legislation , which has been welcomed generally on both sides of the house , and i can not see why anyone who supports anti- slapp legislation would not also support amendment 2 . i certainly will support it and i hope that it gets support across the house . the hon . gentleman is absolutely right . anyone who truly believes in a free press , as he and i do , would want to ensure that we can protect genuine investigative journalism , and that the rich and powerful would not be able to intimidate and bully publishers with limited financial resources — many of them losing money — into not running a story that was essentially true . were amendment 2 to be agreed to , those publishers that chose not to sign up to a recognised regulator would have nothing to lose ; they would be no worse off than they are today . fraser nelson , editor of the spectator , has had a very strong position that he would never join a recognised regulator . it would be open to him not to ; he would be no better and no worse off than he is today , as if something ended up in litigation he would not be paying both sides ’ costs . a publication such as private eye , which famously has never joined anything , would also be free to stand aloof from any kind of regulator , and it would be no better or worse off than it is today . publications such as the daily mail , which have wealthy benefactors standing behind them — people with deep pockets who are willing to pay for litigation and backfill the loses that such companies make — would be no better or worse off than they are today , in that they could decide not to join a regulator . however , those small , plucky publishers that do not have wealthy benefactors standing behind them , and that seek to do genuine investigative journalism that might attract the attention of those threatening legal action , would have the option of joining a recognised regulator , so that they could get protection against that type of strategic litigation brought by the rich and powerful — people with deep pockets — against them . so i say to the minister that i can deliver everything that the government seek , in a way that is fitting with the spirit of the conservative manifesto but that keeps open the option of small publishers being able to gain some protection . let me remind the house why we ended up with section 40 in the first place . there was a public outcry about what was called the phone - hacking scandal — the widespread recognition that a culture had developed that enabled publishers to hack into people ’s phones . it was david cameron , the conservative prime minister , who established the leveson inquiry . it was david cameron who chose lord justice leveson to chair it , because lord justice leveson was known as somebody who was not hostile to the press . lord justice leveson invested huge amounts of his time in coming up with a very sensible set of proposals . it was david cameron who then said we would implement those proposals , with cross - party support from all parties in this house , and it was the conservative whips office that actually whipped the conservative side of the house to implement section 40 , as david cameron wished to happen . let us remember that in that leveson inquiry , dozens of victims of phone hacking came forward to give evidence , and they did so because the prime minister had set up an inquiry and they felt that it was sincere and genuine , and that they could contribute . we all have had constituency cases in which people have been through extraordinary tragedy , and it is painful for them ; but often people who have been through such tragedy want to know that something good has come from it . many of those witnesses who gave evidence to the leveson inquiry were the parents of children who had been murdered , who had had their life rifled through by the media , and they wanted something good to come out of that ; so they went through the trauma and the painful experience of sharing those experiences , to try to help parliament wrestle its way to a sensible compromise . so let us have no nonsense from the government front bench , trying to create some sort of wedge issue . this is a provision that the conservative government put in place , and the royal charter on self - regulation was a very conservative approach to dealing with the challenge . my right hon . friend will forgive me if i have got hold of the wrong end of the stick . he is making a strong case for his amendment , but i have one nagging doubt in my mind . i understand that he believes that if his amendment is agreed to and we remove the stick , newspapers will be protected from the rich and powerful , but what protection would remain for those who are not of means ; those who do not have the money that they can risk in litigation to take on those publishers who may have defamed or libelled them , but who are not members of a regulatory body ? this is not just about the rich and powerful . there could be people who do not have any money who are affected by newspapers , and i am not clear how , in his new landscape , they would be affected . my right hon . friend makes a powerful point , but i am seeking to reach a compromise . his argument is for keeping section 40 in its entirety , so that those who do not have financial means and who face a publisher who refuses to act within any kind of reputable regulator would have some redress in the courts . of course , in section 40 there was only a weighted presumption in favour of a particular approach to costs . it was never a hard and fast rule . my right hon . friend makes a strong case , but i am seeking to form a compromise with the house and with those on the government front bench , and if it is their intention to do what the press want , they can accept my amendment and still look the press in the eye and say , “ we gave you everything you wanted , which is the removal of the stick . ” maybe they hope they will get some positive coverage as a result of doing this favour ; i suspect they will end up being disappointed by that between now and the general election . nevertheless , i am trying to make a compromise with them . i hope that the government will look seriously at this . will my right hon . friend help the house by saying whether he has had any communication with the guardian or private eye on this proposal ? i had multiple conversations with lots of publishers when the original leveson architecture was put together , particularly around the royal charter . i know that private eye has always objected to joining anything at all , and it would be completely unaffected by the proposal . it is not a member of the independent press standards organisation , and it was never a member of the press complaints commission . it has always remained entirely aloof , and there is nothing in the proposal that affects its position . nor would anything in the proposal affect , say , the spectator , which also has a view that it would not join a recognised regulator . as i said , small publishers that want to do genuine investigative journalism and that do not have people with deep pockets standing behind them could benefit from the proposal by signing up to a recognised regulator . many of them are already members of impress , which is the recognised regulator at the moment , but others may form different regulators or encourage ipso to join and seek recognition , so that they can benefit from that cost protection . i intend to press amendment 2 to a division later . i hope the government will recognise that they can accommodate the provision and that it can be consistent with their manifesto commitment . i hope that we will not hear any nonsense from the front bench about freedom of the press , because what i am suggesting would strengthen the freedom of the press , rather than weakening it . i would like to run through a number of the amendments in my name , which have largely been promoted by the national union of journalists . i will also say that new clause 2 appears to be part of the unfinished business of leveson , which we need to move on fairly swiftly to ensure that people have proper redress and protections , while maintaining the freedom of the press . i want to cover a number of issues in my amendments , such as the protection of public service broadcasting , diversity within the sector , media literacy and the demands for consultation on media changes . new clause 21 would add a detailed description of the range of genres that ofcom must report whether the public service broadcasters have made available . it would also give ofcom the responsibility to measure the extent of public service broadcasting across specific genres and the ability to set quotas if it felt that specific genres were not covered adequately . it comes from a campaign by the voice of the listener & viewer to protect the requirements in the psbs ’ remit to broadcast programmes within specific genres . section 264 of the communications act 2003 sets out in some detail the requirements on public service broadcasting across a whole range of different genres , including “ cultural activity ” , “ the extent that is appropriate for facilitating civic understanding and fair and well - informed debate on news and current affairs , ” religion and so on . i will not go through the full list — it is very detailed . the problem is that the bill , as it stands , updates that position , but with a generalised list of what will be taken into account and protected in terms of the genres of audio - visual content . there is a general concern that that could lead to a number of specific areas , such as science or religion , becoming vulnerable . there will still be a variety of genres that there is no specific requirement on public service broadcasters to broadcast . the select committee carrying out pre - legislative scrutiny of the bill raised the matter in its discussions . it felt that the government ’s replacing the list of specific commitments required of a public service broadcaster with a general remit was a “ step too far ” . the government ’s response was that their amendment was simply a simplification . even the chair of the select committee said the simplification of the remit and enforcement of it for ofcom would come at a considerable cost . a number of pieces of evidence submitted to the committee drew attention to areas where the requirement on public service broadcasters could be significantly weakened , even to the point of the overall removal of content . i will quote the example given by anna mcnamee , the executive director of the sandford st martin trust , about what is happening with regard to the coverage of religion . she said : “ in 2003 itv successfully lobbied ofcom for its psb quotas for arts and religious content to be removed ” and , unfortunately : “ in 2015 ofcom noticed that itv ’s provision of religion and ethics had all but ceased . ” the lesson from that drawn to the committee and the minister ’s attention was that there was : “ no quota : no obligation to do so ” and that , under competing pressures , individual genres and sections of broadcasting would be deleted overall . what we felt was needed in the legislation was a statutory requirement that , where there is an identification of societal value of a particular genre , ofcom would be able to track the psbs ’ performance and ensure that the distinctive content is available to audiences . that is a reflection of ofcom ’s own concerns so far . it has noticed a decline in the provision of those genres . broadcasting legislation — until this bill — has set out what is considered societally valuable content and defined the remit of ofcom and psb in that way . unfortunately , this generalised statement within the bill fails to enable that to happen in the future . my new clause 21 would provide ofcom with stronger powers , with a clearer remit of what should be protected and the ability to set quotas if it considers current levels in certain genres to be unsatisfactory . it should allow the regulator to stem the significant decline of those genres since 2013 . my new clause 22 would place a duty on public service broadcasters to publish their objectives on the promotion of diversity and equality among the workforce and on ofcom to monitor and report on the public service broadcasters ’ performance on meeting that requirement . that comes out of an analysis of what is happening with regard to the diversity of the workforce in broadcasting . if public service broadcasting is to represent all sectors of the uk population , the workforce should be truly representative . that is a general view that has been expressed across the house . ofcom has recognised that broadcasters with advanced data collection practices tend to have more representative workforces . the new clause would further empower ofcom to specify what kinds of data companies should be required to monitor and publish , therefore ensuring that they are looking at the impact of their diversity policies . some of the figures on the lack of diversity in broadcasting are quite startling . if we take class as an example , people from working - class backgrounds are under - represented in the broadcasting sector . some 28 % of employees who provided data were from a working - class background , below the uk population figure of 39 % . in terms of gender diversity , men remain dominant in most senior roles , in particular the important roles of director—74.5%—and writers , with 67.3 % . the number of women in senior roles has actually dropped in recent years from 46.8 % to 45.4 % . that has been declining continuously over the past four years . the figures for ethnicity are also pretty stark in terms of the lack of representation . again , we are finding that without adequate monitoring , there has been a lack of any form of influence to improve the situation . the creative diversity network ran a project called diamond to monitor diversity , but a number of the unions did not participate because the broadcasters had failed to share their statistics . nevertheless , there were significant contributions made by individuals working offscreen and onscreen , reflecting people ’s concerns about the lack of diversity in terms of gender , ethnicity and disability . there are stark figures that demonstrate the lack of representation in public service broadcasting . this new clause is simply intended to ensure that adequate statistics are provided and data collected , and that ofcom ’s monitoring and intervention powers are strengthened . i once met a young lady who was keen to work in television and she told me that she wanted to be a presenter . however , because she wears a hijab , she was sure that she would never get to be a presenter — she had never seen any presenter wearing a hijab . does the right hon . gentleman feel , as i do , that transparency in reporting those figures would help make clear to everybody what diversity is lacking ? the reason for this new clause — i am not pushing it to a vote or anything — is to encourage the debate further , because we seem to have hit a brick wall , or a glass ceiling , whichever hon . members prefer . part of the reason those attitudes persist is the lack of ethnic minorities , particularly in senior positions . the figure for black , asian or minority ethnic community members in all senior roles is just 13 % , an under - representation compared with the population ; for senior producers it is 5.5 % and for heads of production it is 7.4 % . south asian representation offscreen at all levels has actually fallen to 2.4 % , less than half of the figure in the population as a whole , which is around 5 % . the reason for this new clause is to stimulate debate because , in addition to the failure of the existing system to maintain levels , we are going backwards in some areas . not only is the number of people with disabilities in senior roles at a low level , but it has not changed in four years . there needs to be greater intervention and more powers to monitor and to require the delivery of statistics , and there needs to be proper participation by public service broadcasters in that . ofcom also needs the ability to intervene more effectively . just quickly , because other hon . members want to speak , i will say that new clause 23 is intended to place on public service broadcasters a duty to report on media literacy . it would introduce a requirement for public service broadcasters to take appropriate steps to improve levels of media literacy among their audiences and allow ofcom to monitor that to see how the public broadcasters are pursuing that media literacy requirement . the reason for this new clause is that things have moved on since the communications act 2003 . i remember that debate at that point was around teletext ; the huge expansion of social media had not been anticipated , still less the arrival of artificial intelligence . i do not think i need to stress in this house the importance of countering misinformation , disinformation , fake news , conspiracy theories and the like across social media , or the need to raise the issue of media literacy more widely . public service broadcasters have an even greater role and duty now not only to provide impartial and accurate information , but to increase media literacy and make greater efforts to reach all age groups in the uk , particularly young people . the bbc ’s marianna spring , as people will know , is charged with covering some of these issues for the bbc , and a number of other broadcasters try independently to check the veracity of factual claims or to make an assessment of the credibility of sources , particularly in areas where there is conflict around the world . however , there is a need now to be more explicit about the issues that people face in the interpretation of media . for that reason , it is time for a duty to be placed upon public service broadcasters to develop media literacy strategies , which will enable the receivers of their broadcasts to better understand and better cut through some of the misinformation that is being purveyed . there has been debate in this house already about the need for a greater recognition within the media itself of the threat posed by artificial intelligence . we have already seen the danger of artificially generated news stories and images , with reports of inaccurate data being used to inform artificial intelligence - generated stories , false attributions to journalists and creators , and people discovering that their likenesses have been used without their knowledge or consent . that is why the nuj is trying to encourage the debate about who is responsible for raising the levels media literacy . new clause 23 would simply put a statutory duty upon public service broadcasters to develop and publish a strategy for what they are doing to raise media literacy , and give ofcom a role in monitoring that . new clause 24 is a requirement for public service broadcasters to report on their consultation with the public , viewers and listeners . a number of members of the house were involved in the discussions with the bbc about local radio services and the cutbacks that were taking place , with no consultation with the recipients of the local radio services , the listeners themselves . we saw the same with regards to the bbc ’s news channel and bbc world service cutbacks . we found that there were groups who were not consulted or engaged whatsoever . as a result , we believe that poor decisions were made . it is within the bbc ’s governance framework and the royal charter to highlight public service broadcasters ’ obligation to regularly consult the general public and key demographics of viewers and listeners when making key decisions about programming and services to local communities . that seems to have fallen down dramatically in recent years . it is also important that other public service broadcasters are placed under that obligation . new clause 24 puts public service broadcasters under an obligation to develop and publish a strategy for maintaining regular consultation , and gives ofcom a duty to report on whether that is being undertaken appropriately . although the new clause does not deal with this , we urge the government to ensure that there is a recognition in the negotiations on the licence fee next time around that there is a proper process for the bbc to consult , rather than trying to negotiate secret deals with the government . my final point is on amendment 87 . the issue here , which relates to amendments from other hon . members that i will be supporting , is requiring a provider of regulated television selection to give significant prominence to designated internet programme services . it is vital that the digital platforms for on - demand tv do not exclude public service broadcasting content or relegate it to hard - to - find recesses of their sites . the wording of the bill requires such content to be given appropriate prominence , which we fear is too weak . raising the requirements to significant prominence would better ensure that public service broadcasting has the level of prominence that the viewing public would expect . there are other amendments that i welcome and support , particularly new clauses 5 and 7 , as they extend the variety of and the commitment to public service broadcasting and the content that viewers would want to see . for information , i intend to call those who have tabled amendments before other members . i call sir john whittingdale . you are absolutely right , madam deputy speaker ; i have an amendment that i would like to speak to . it might be slightly unusual for the person who was the minister taking the bill through committee then to seek to amend the bill on report , but i am sure it is not unprecedented , and i hope my amendment is nevertheless helpful to the government . it is certainly my intention that it should be . i have taken the bill through committee , and it has already been subject to a lot of scrutiny by the culture , media and sport committee , in this house and in the other place , and with the publication of a draft bill . i am therefore slightly surprised to see the number of government amendments that have been tabled . most are relatively minor and technical , and i welcome the measure that would correct the anomaly around independent national radio , requiring it to continue to broadcast on am , even though fewer and fewer people are now accessing radio by those means . it is right to remove that anomaly . amendment 78 addresses local television , which was the invention of my right hon . friend i have a sky glass television , which is an iptv set , and at the moment i can not get local television on it at all . one reason for that — and the reason the government have previously given for not including local tv on the list of channels to be given prominence — is the absence of an app to deliver local tv . when i was filling in for the minister over the past few months i had a meeting with local tv and was told that an app will be forthcoming quite soon that will allow local television to be received by iptv . the government suggested in a letter to my right hon . friend as we know , media bills do not come along every day , and this is our single opportunity to update the law covering the range of media services . it is likely that there will not be another opportunity for some considerable time . my amendment would allow ofcom , at a future date , to recommend the inclusion of a local tv app , as and when it emerges , in the prominence regime . it would ensure that the bill future - proofs the regime so that it can be amended in such a way . i hope the government will consider adopting that measure . i understand it is unlikely that they will accept my amendment , but i ask the minister whether she will continue to look at this issue and , if the government believe it is appropriate , consider tabling an amendment to that effect in the house of lords . on new clause 3 , regarding the abolition of section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 , i was slightly surprised to learn from my right hon . friend is my right hon . friend saying that there were no drafting errors in the 2017 manifesto ? there may have been — i am not quite sure which others my right hon . friend might be referring to , but i am pretty certain that that was not one of them . nobody ever said that they objected to the cost protections for the press contained in section 40 . the arguments against section 40 were always shorthand arguments that essentially claimed falsely that it would require publishers to pay the costs of others — and that only related to one small part of section 40 . my right hon . friend is right , but as i think i pointed out on second reading , not a single major publisher has chosen to apply for recognition by the press recognition panel through joining a recognised regulator . but is that not precisely because the government failed to move the incentives that encouraged people to join ? as the minister responsible , who said that we would not implement section 40 , i had considerable talks . it was made plain that if the government had implemented section 40 , no major publisher would apply for recognition . my right hon . friend talked about the carrot and stick , and his new clause would require the government to look for alternative incentives to encourage publishers to apply for recognition , even if the existing carrot and stick were removed . he did not go into detail in his speech about what alternative incentive there might be ; it sounded slightly like a reference to marlon brando ’s making “ an offer you ca n’t refuse ” . the press have been absolutely plain : they object to any regulator that carries the stamp of government approval . that is the fundamental principle that has caused every publisher to say that they will not apply for recognition . my right hon . friend knows that it is not a government regulator . the press recognition panel was established by the royal charter on self - regulation of the press . the conservative party established that as a royal charter rather than a regulatory body for precisely that reason — to accommodate that wish of the press . i did not suggest it was a government regulator , but nevertheless , any regulator that requires government approval through the press recognition panel is viewed by the press as having a government stamp of approval , which they regard as unacceptable . my right hon . friend spoke about the discussions he had , but he would agree that the stick and the carrot at that time were thought to be necessary to persuade red - top publishers such as the daily mail and the sun to join a regulator recognised by the prp . what i do not think he anticipated — indeed , nobody anticipated it at the time — was that not a single major publisher would agree to co - operate with the regime that was being put in place . that includes the guardian , the independent , the observer and the financial times . not one major publisher said that it would co - operate with the system that was put in place , so it has plainly failed . for that reason alone the government should revisit the issue , remove section 40 , and instead encourage those who do not currently accept the ruling of an independent regulator to join the one in existence , which is ipso . i know that my right hon . friend and i will not agree on this point , but his suggestion that it was somehow an oversight to include a commitment to repeal in the manifestos of 2017 and 2019 is simply not correct . he will be aware that there is unanimity among all the major publishers that section 40 represents an attack on media freedom . it is not just the publishers who hold that view ; many campaigning organisations , such as reporters without borders , have actually downgraded the uk ’s press freedom rating because of the existence of section 40 , and it is certainly viewed as an infringement of media freedom . this is one of the issues on which my right hon . friend and i agree . may i suggest that those who wish to follow this up afterwards read a book called “ the laughter of triumph ” , by ben wilson ? it is about william hone and the fight for a free press back in 1817 . the press should not be forced into any government regulation ; there should be the law of the land , and that is it . i am extremely grateful to my right hon . friend . i hope that this is not the only issue on which we agree , but it is certainly one on which we hold the same view . for that reason , i am sorry that my right hon . friend we should remind ourselves why we are here : it is because those who were described by alan bates , the leader of the horizon scandal complainants , as “ small , skinny people ” needed redress against the huge , overbearing press . the hacked off website pointed out that in 2021 , only 0.6 % of more than 14,000 complaints were upheld by ipso — only 88 cases in total , which is a minuscule number . is that a sign that the system is working ? i do not think success can be judged simply on the number of complaints upheld . indeed , as we have seen in other organisations , such as the bbc , we may find that a large number of those complaints relate to a single issue that has generated a great deal of concern . it is not as simple as , “ there were x thousand complaints , and only so many were upheld . ” generally , however , ipso is definitely an improvement on the press complaints commission , which went before it . it is not perfect — no regulator ever is — and i myself have criticised it for not having yet imposed any fines , but the atmosphere surrounding the behaviour of the press is very different from what it was when , for instance , hacked off was created , and when i chaired the inquiry on phone hacking , which led to the establishment of sir brian leveson ’s report . i do not want to detain the house any longer . i intend to press the government , but not as far as a vote ; i should say that i urge the government to look at ways in which they can support local television through my amendment . given the point about section 40 , i can not support the new clause tabled by my right hon . friend the member for camborne and redruth . i want to express my gratitude for the fact that the bill has been prioritised in this new term , and is progressing quickly . for our public service broadcasters in particular , this legislation is long overdue . i want to refer to my amendment about the language surrounding prominence for psbs such as the bbc , itv and channel 4 . the bill gives public service content an “ appropriate ” level of prominence on online services , which should make it easier to find not only the apps that take us to the bbc or itv on a smart tv , but to find those channels on the traditional tv guide with which we are all familiar . however , the culture , media and sport committee made the suggestion , which i have tabled in the form of an amendment , that the word “ appropriate ” is perhaps unhelpfully subjective , and should be replaced with “ significant ” . the prominence of psbs is an existential issue that should not be underestimated , so i ask the government to consider that suggestion as the bill progresses . i thank the hon . gentleman for tabling his amendment . i strongly agree with him : the issue can not just be left in the air , given the importance of public service broadcasting . i therefore think that the guidance for ofcom should be stronger than the government have recognised so far . i look forward to hearing from the minister what they propose to do about that . i thank the right hon . member for her intervention . let me move on to the subject of channel 4 and the removal of the restriction on in - house production . i have concerns about that change to channel 4 ’s model , which has worked extremely well for a long time , although the previous secretary of state was not so keen on its existence — or , at least , its future . channel 4 has historically supported the independent production sector throughout the uk , in places such as my constituency in the far north of scotland , but there are concerns that allowing it to create its own content could destabilise the sector . given the government ’s track record on channel 4 , my ultimate fear is that this could be used as a stick with which to beat the channel , although i hope that does not happen . that being said , channel 4 and the independent production sector are integral to each other , which is why i am glad to see the channel ’s qualifying independent commitment to the sector increased to 40 % , and to hear that any changes are likely to be very gradual , allowing the market to adjust accordingly . that can only be a good thing . i come to the new clause tabled by on the subject of local radio — something that i have mentioned in the past , and was beaten up about when i was a councillor long ago — i tabled amendments 7 to 13 to broaden the scope of the requirements in local radio broadcasting licences , so that the current scope of “ local material ” as “ news , information and other spoken material and music ” is retained . if only i could have heard myself say those words all those years ago ! i can see the good that it does . it would not be right for the bbc to be left as sole provider of local speech radio . on a similar point , i welcome part 6 of the bill , which safeguards the future of the industry with relation to voice - activated smart devices . local radio is integral to upholding democracy — a point made many times by many of us in this place . it provides trusted news and information , particularly during an emergency , as we saw during covid , and also provides entertainment . that is especially important to my constituents , who , as may be imagined , often face long drives across very large rural areas . new clause 3 and amendments 2 to 4 relate to section 40 and our press , a subject already mentioned by a number of members today . ten years ago , all the parties made commitments to the victims of press abuse that we would introduce the system of regulation recommended in the leveson report to protect the public from press wrongdoing . we in this country benefit from a vibrant and rich media , as was pointed out in an urgent question earlier today , but whereas our broadcasting media are the envy of the world , our print media languish at the bottom of international league tables when it comes to public trust and confidence . however , the government now seek to repeal section 40 , although they have no plans to replace it with any alternative mechanism of independent and impartial regulation . that not only leaves local and independent newspapers unable to defend themselves against expensive litigation in the form of strategic lawsuits against public participation , but makes it harder for a normal person to take legal action against a large publisher . as they say , those with the deepest pockets win . these amendments offer two ways forward . new clause 3 and amendments 3 and 4 would permit the repeal of section 40 , but not before there has been a consultation on alternative incentives for the leveson system . amendment 2 would repeal the part of section 40 that would disadvantage unregulated newspapers , but keep the part that protects local independent titles that have done the right thing and signed up to regulation . under either of those amendments , national newspapers would face no detriment at all for their potentially bad behaviour — there is no free speech reason to object to them — but they allow us to show our support for the victims of press abuse and for the underlying principles of independent regulation . many sensible amendments have been tabled to this bill , and i am glad that the majority of us in the house and , indeed , the industry are singing from the same hymn sheet . the world and the way in which our media operate have changed beyond recognition since the communications act 2003 , and i and my party will be very pleased to watch this bill make its way swiftly through both houses , so that our legislation at last reflects the world we live in today . i close by paying tribute to members for the great efforts that have been made on all sides of this house to make sure that this legislation is fit for purpose . i call the father of the house . i am grateful to some people may have only read press descriptions of ben stokes doing a backhanded flip to the wicket . that can be well described by people such as neville cardus and his successors , but it is even better to watch it in real life . i believe that the number of listed events should be expanded . however , as the bbc and others have reminded us , the number of people watching events on the other side of the world at midnight or four in the morning might be 400,000 , whereas those who would want to watch those events the next day might be 4 million or 14 million . i believe that the new clause should be accepted , and i hope that the minister will say some comforting words . like many others , i do not propose to push my new clause to a division today , but i do hope that the government will respond by tabling an amendment or a new clause in the house of lords that has the same effect . i could read out my full briefing , but the point has been well made by the hon . member for caithness , sutherland and easter ross , and may be made by others . what is the reason for embracing the future ? it is not just about linear television ; there is the opportunity for other rights . so many rights are bought by commercial businesses outside this country . what do they care about what happens in one part of the world broadcasting framework ? we must have a requirement to stop those who think they can make money by making most people not watch key events , and making those who do watch pay a lot . people should be able to watch coverage on ordinary public service broadcasting . my belief is that , for major events , the competition between the public service broadcasters will be sufficient to ensure a fair return for those who buy the rights . i do not believe in having an unrestricted auction , so that people can buy rights that will exclude most people in the country from watching sporting events of great importance . there have been examples of rights holders — sky has done this well — making an event available on normal public service broadcasting , as well as on their own service , when one of our national teams has got into a final . i pay tribute to sky for doing that . i want to follow up on the words of i say to the government : pay attention to what he has said , look to colin browne for what viewers and listeners have said , and accept the amendment , so that the requirements are explicit , and the responses by the public service broadcasters are open . i believe that we can make a success of this bill . i know that broadcasting regulation is normally about 10 years behind the technology , and i remember that about 30 years ago , david mellor had to change a virtually complete bill on report because so much had changed between the bill being drafted and its third reading in the house of commons . i believe that we can make a major change , and i can sum this up to the government in words that someone has offered me , which are absolutely right : “ do n’t let this opportunity pass by . the time to act is now . once these moments go behind a paywall , that ’s the final whistle . ” let us make all major events available to all people , at least in excerpts , so that they can watch them in daylight . i call the shadow secretary of state . i refer hon . and right hon . members to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . i thank all colleagues , particularly my hon . friends the members for barnsley east ( stephanie peacock ) and for eltham ( clive efford ) , and my right hon . friend in general , my colleagues on the labour benches and i are supportive of this bill . it has been too long in the making , and the delays have held back the uk ’s world - leading public service broadcasters . they have also affected the productivity of the creative industries as a whole , and the public service broadcast sector is such a large and important part of the creative industries and their commissioning . the last time broad changes were enacted for our public service broadcasters was in 2003 . i think we can all agree that the world is now a very different place , but better late than never . broadly speaking , i believe this is a good bill , and we support it . our public service broadcasters are a fundamental part of british cultural life . if we did not have them , we would want to invent them , and this bill gives them and the wider broadcasting industry the tools they need to survive in the modern world . the bill contains crucial measures to ensure that uk broadcasters can thrive in a digital age by protecting radio services when they are accessed on smart speakers , and by ensuring the fair prominence of public service broadcasters on smart tvs . i will return to the question of prominence shortly . however , the bill does not take full advantage of the opportunity it creates to shape the broadcasting industry for the next decade . although we will not seek to disrupt or delay the passage of the bill , there are areas where we believe it can and should be strengthened and improved . i hope the minister will listen to our suggestions in the new clauses and amendments standing in my name and that of my hon . friend the member for barnsley east . new clause 9 concerns children ’s television . for many children and young people , public service broadcasting is an important part of how they learn and in particular how they learn to understand the world — it is a central part of how their curiosity is ignited . the bill as drafted fails to recognise that importance by neglecting to try to understand how the viewing habits of children and young people are changing . provision for children by public service broadcasters is under threat because so few children now watch live tv . the top - rated programme on cbbc attracts as few as 50,000 viewers . children carry entertainment in their pockets , and they can and do switch between various apps and platforms in a matter of seconds , which is understandably affecting investment in children ’s programming . that creates a vicious cycle : as investment and resources decline , so too does the quality of the output . instead of trying to provide high - quality , uniquely british public service content for children , broadcasters are then forced to prioritise profitable content that offers little public value and can be sold internationally . our new clause 9 would enable the government to take an important first step , recognise the problem and explore routes forward . it would be a shame not to take advantage of this opportunity to shape children ’s programming for the future , in what is supposed to be a forward - looking piece of legislation . i ask the minister to give that some consideration . the bill also fails to go far enough on age classification . the hon . members for penistone and stocksbridge ( miriam cates ) and for south west devon ( sir gary streeter ) have tabled amendments in this area , for which i thank them , alongside our new clause 14 , which shows the breadth of feeling across the house . all these amendments look to tackle the same underlying issue , which is that there is no consistency in how age ratings are currently used on streaming sites . parents and children alike deserve to be able to have full confidence in age ratings so that when they pick something to watch , they can trust that it will be safe and age - appropriate . ratings must be easily understood and recognisable by the public and underpinned by a transparent set of criteria that take into account british attitudes on everything from swearing to violence and anything else we might think of . new clause 14 does not , in my view , overengineer the issue . it does not require every on - demand service to use any specific age rating provider , although we should collectively recognise that the british board of film classification is a great example of best practice . our public service broadcasters already follow stringent rules , which may mean that age ratings are not appropriate for their content , but where age ratings are already used , there should be clear criteria against which ofcom can measure their success and quality . the bill also falls short when it comes to digital rights to listed events . listed events have already generated some debate , and i have a great deal of sympathy with the points made by other hon . and right hon . members about various sporting events . this legislation is supposed to contribute to the future - proofing of public service broadcasters , but i feel that to do that it needs to go further . our new clause 10 seeks to address that . the rights to broadcast moments of national sporting importance are offered first to channels such as the bbc and itv , enabling the broadest possible range of british people to watch the likes of wimbledon and the olympics . we agree with the aim of the bill , which is to protect and modernise the system , while making a few changes to ensure that it is appropriate in the digital age , but unfortunately the bill falls short in this regard . by not extending the regime to include online clips and highlights , the bill risks preventing thousands upon thousands of people from feeling the joy of watching british athletes or cricketers compete on the world stage , particularly when those competitions are happening far away , as happened this week with ben stokes and co. considering that the next men ’s football world cup and the next two olympics after paris 2024 — will the hon . lady give way ? i am happy to give way . the shadow secretary of state mentions sporting events . in addition to protecting the six nations for us all in group a , would she accept the principle that scottish , welsh and northern irish football fans should have the same access to their national teams as english fans do at present ? of course i would , and i am glad to confirm what my hon . friend the member for barnsley east said in committee . if the hon . gentleman is trying to press me on a specific aspect , i am also happy to confirm that we would support the new clause tabled in his name if it were pushed to a vote . i will be interested to see whether colleagues in his party will support our new clause on gaelic broadcasting , as they seemed not to vote for it in committee . it will be interesting to see whether they take up that challenge as well . it is likely that , even in the near future , key sporting moments will take place in the middle of the night in this country . despite the fact that conservative ministers ordered a review of this in 2022 , there is simply nothing in this bill as drafted to update the listed events rules so that clips or highlights from those events do not get stuck behind a paywall . our new clause 10 seeks to guarantee that action is taken on this issue , but it is flexible enough to accommodate whatever mechanisms are identified as most appropriate following their review . i also note new clause 7 , in the name of the father of the house , if ministers can not lend their support to either of these amendments , they should at the very least publish the response to the review in full . it would be helpful if the government took up the suggestion from my hon . friend the member for barnsley east that criteria be published , so that we get a clearer sense , rather than having this ad hoc debate — sympathetic though i may be to certain sporting events . there is the question of national fairness — that is a principle — and also the question of what criteria we should use to add to the listings regime . new clause 12 seeks to fix another problem with the bill , which is that it fails to take the rising popularity of podcasts into account . i have mentioned podcasts before on the floor of the house , and it gives me great pleasure to mention them again when discussing the regulation of selection services for audio content . some 10 million adults listen to podcasts every week . it is emerging as a format that encourages collaboration , new partnerships , interesting discussion and the presence of a range of politicians and other personalities who have something interesting or unique to say . it seems counterintuitive , therefore , to exclude this fast - growing audio medium from the bill . for example , the bill as drafted guarantees access to the lbc breakfast show with nick ferrari but not to “ the news agents ” podcast . some of us will be listening to both , and we expect similar treatment for both . this new clause would simply provide that consistency . new clause 11 is designed to ensure that public service content is available to linear services as well as online . part 1 of the media bill introduces new measures to allow public service broadcasters to meet some of their remit requirements through their online services and on - demand channels . given that streaming and on - demand are growing rapidly , this seems a reasonable forward - looking change . however , there are still millions of people who watch their television through a traditional broadcast set - up . this group of people primarily includes older residents , families in rural areas and those struggling with bills as a result of the cost of living crisis . it is crucial that they can still access public service content as usual . this new clause would give ofcom the means to assess whether public service broadcasting delivery on linear services was adequate ; and , if it found that provision to be inadequate , it would have the power to set binding quotas . i have already mentioned new clause 13 , which encourages the secretary of state to consider and take advice on whether a gaelic language service should be recognised as a public service broadcaster in its own right . this was raised by my hon . friend the member for barnsley east in committee . bbc alba , the gaelic language television service provided by mg alba and the bbc , is a huge asset , providing a wide range of high quality programming for gaelic speakers to enjoy and sustaining around 340 jobs , half of which are in economically fragile areas . however , despite apparent cross - party support for the service , gaelic language broadcasting is still not recognised in legislation across the board in the same way as other minority language services are . that is not to say that gaelic language broadcasting can be directly compared to welsh broadcasting , for example , but it is an acknowledgment of the importance of language to our cultural life . language is a daily expression of our history , and gaelic language broadcasting is an important forum for that expression . it should therefore be considered for recognition in law . i really hate to say this , but it is worth pointing out , in the context of gaelic and welsh , that the situation for gaelic is very precarious indeed . it is strong enough in some of the western isles , but we need to remember that it needs to be nurtured big time now . the hon . gentleman makes a valid and valuable contribution . my hon . friend the member for barnsley east , the shadow minister with responsibility for media , has met those bodies recently . we understand the points that he is making and take them fully on board . this new clause , tabled in my name and that of my hon . friend , is not prescriptive as to how we break the cycle ; it leaves multiple options open to the secretary of state . i turn to clause 50 and the amendment tabled in the name of we on the labour benches want a press that is regulated in a way that makes it accountable for its reporting and that meets the highest ethical and journalistic standards . we want to see a financially sustainable free press in the uk that can carry on holding power to account . clause 50 repeals section 40 of the crime and courts act , but if the right hon . member for camborne and redruth pushes his amendment 2 to a division this evening , we will support it , because it offers a way through by keeping some of what he refers to as the carrots . indeed , by removing some of the sticks , his amendment would incentivise more publishers to join up with an approved regulator , for the reasons that he has outlined much more coherently and clearly than i can now . we thank him for working co - operatively with us . it is interesting to hear that the opposition intend to support my right hon . friend i thank the right hon . gentleman for his intervention , but i am speaking about amendment 2 , which we will support for the reasons that the right hon . member for camborne and redruth set out . i want to see publishers protected from defamation cases brought by russian oligarchs and other wealthy individuals or corporations looking to evade scrutiny in the public interest . the government have promised to do more to protect people from slapps , but they have yet to come forward with concrete proposals . we would like to see those measures brought forward , as they are needed to secure our free press . we also look forward to seeing the private member ’s bill of my hon . friend it is an important principle that ordinary citizens should be able to access justice . as the right hon . member for camborne and redruth said , amendment 2 would remove the stick . if that encourages more publishers to join the approved regulator , it would create more compliance with the arbitration scheme , which is another reason why we support the amendment . how will the government protect publishers from slapps and give complainants access to justice ? i acknowledge the amendments and new clauses tabled by my right hon . friend before closing , i wish to raise a couple of concerns with the minister on government amendments 37 to 39 . those amendments appear to lack clarity and purpose , and they may weaken the position of public service broadcasters in future negotiations with commercial broadcasters . i urge the government to reconsider them , and at least to make it clear to the house what problem they are trying to solve . we support the bill in general terms . i hope members will join me in supporting the amendments i have outlined , including amendment 2 tabled by the right hon . member for camborne and redruth and our new clause 13 on gaelic . we feel that these amendments would strengthen the bill , benefiting people across the country and helping to support our broadcasters in the coming years . i am pleased to speak in support of amendment 18 , tabled in my name and the names of other hon . members . i generally welcome this bill as a valiant attempt to bring the law and regulation up to date in a fast - moving sector of our society , namely broadcasting and on - screen entertainment . i will focus on part 4 , which deals with on - demand programme services and , in particular , clause 38 , which will usher in a comprehensive review , to be undertaken by ofcom , of audience protection and the production of a video on demand code . this welcome bill reflects how many people watch their entertainment today . my two oldest grandchildren , aged 19 and 18 , rarely watch anything on television , but they are always on their tablets or smartphones . they have no concept of seeing what is on the box in the evening , and maybe even recording it , as my wife and i still do . they simply source and download what they want to watch , when they want to watch it , via video on demand . it is therefore important that we ensure the very best protection is in place , not so much for them — they are both adults now — but for my 12 - year - old granddaughter , my seven - year - old grandson and even my two - year - old granddaughter , who has her own tablet on which she watches “ peppa pig ” and “ the wheels on the bus”—i can confirm that the wheels go round an awful lot . [ laughter . ] after 20 years , i am so sick of hearing that song . ensuring adequate audience protection measures for video on demand is vital , and clause 38 makes a commendable start , but i believe that amendment 18 — shades of which are mirrored in amendments tabled by members on both sides of the house , as was mentioned by the shadow secretary of state — would enhance that protection . the amendment contains the following reasonable provision : “ when considering the adequacy of age ratings , ofcom must report on the extent to which any age ratings used by providers are — ( a ) clear and well understood by consumers ; ( b ) underpinned by a published and transparent set of standards ; and ( c ) informed by regular and substantive consultation with the uk public . ” i do not think that is asking too much , and i therefore hope the government will consider it carefully . the government have said that the bill ’s objective is to bring in “ stronger protections from harmful or age - inappropriate shows through a new ofcom … video - on - demand code ” . amendment 18 simply sets out objective criteria to achieve this aim with regard to age ratings . all it requires is that age ratings are clear , transparent and reflect uk expectations about what is age appropriate . that is not a high bar to expect services to meet . as others have said , we are very fortunate in the uk to have a tried and trusted classifier of content , namely the british board of film classification , which has been age - rating our movies ever since i first went to the pictures in tiverton to see james bond in “ thunderball”—i wonder how many colleagues remember that underwater film — and probably for a lot longer than that . the bbfc now rates online content and video on demand . opinion polls and surveys tell us that parents understand and trust the bbfc ’s rating system . my informal survey of parents in my constituency over the past few weeks has confirmed that . it is the gold standard , and the threshold against which ofcom can consider the sector as a whole . it is therefore reassuring that netflix , apple and amazon all use bbfc ratings for their video content . amendment 18 would not force every content producer to use bbfc ratings , but it would help to ensure that each rating system is fit for purpose . that is the bare minimum we can do to prevent commercial vod services from exposing children to harmful content because , sadly , all is not well in this sector . it grieves me to say that that is particularly so in relation to disney . the current ratings free - for - all has seen disney+ classifying scenes of sexual abuse as suitable for nine - year - olds and scenes of graphic , misogynistic violence or offensive antisemitic stereotypes as suitable for 12 - year - olds . that is lower than it classifies some of its “ star wars ” and superhero content . until we hold services to a minimum standard , we risk eroding public trust in age ratings as a child - protection measure , and thus perpetuating this entirely preventable harm . the problem with disney and disney+ is that , for most of us , the brand conjures a sense of safety and security that is no longer warranted . when people of my generation hear the word disney , we think of “ bambi ” or “ cinderella ” , so the thought that our grandchildren are in the next room watching a disney+ video is intrinsically reassuring . but that would be an error of judgment , because much of its content is now dark and explicit . disney ’s rating system is very different from the bbfc ’s , and it is based on a dutch system . transparency and consistency must be part of the new vod code , and ofcom should consider the current lack of coherence and consistency in its review and future work . amendment 18 does not seek to change the scope of the bill or prevent new innovations in audience protection . it is not about mandating any particular solution . most of us know and respect bbfc age ratings , but nobody will be forced to adopt age ratings where they are not appropriate or not expected , such as on services operated by public service broadcasters . it is purely about setting objective benchmark standards to ensure that , where age ratings are used , they are effective for the purpose of child protection . as that is the stated purpose of the bill , i hope the amendment will attract government support . it is not my intention to divide the house on amendment 18 , but i hope that the excellent minister will introduce similar amendments in the other place . if she does not , i am confident that similar amendments will be tabled in the other place that are likely to be supported , and i certainly would not vote against them when they come back to this place . i call the snp spokesperson . i want to respond briefly to the issues just raised by anything in the bill that relates specifically to on - demand services , therefore , even when it comes to age ratings or some of the other requirements we are putting on on - demand services , will apply only to sky glass , fire tv and those sorts of things . that is why i tabled new clause 20 , which would amend the bill to recognise how quickly things move , as a number of members have pointed out . the way that we consume media changes very regularly , and it has certainly changed dramatically in the 20 years since a media bill was previously proposed . i therefore ask ministers to look at the definition of on - demand services and consider whether it continues to be appropriate ; if it does not , new clause 20 would ensure that ofcom is able to regulate all those places where people watch television . i originally tabled the new clause because of the incredibly high percentage , comparatively , of people in scotland who watch television exclusively on consoles , without the psb prominence that we might expect in services that are specifically for streaming tv . i will speak to a number of the amendments tabled by members across the house , starting with those tabled by the snp . i have covered my concerns about the definition of on - demand services , and generally i do not think that the bill as drafted is all - encompassing enough . the issue of smaller studios , which is covered in our amendments 82 to 85 , was raised with me by the media reform coalition . having quotas for independent studios is good , but some broadcasters have a predilection to using only the super - indies , which account for about 20 % of the companies that make independent productions ; the smaller indies account for about 80 % . some broadcasters commission almost everything from that 20 % of the market , from companies such as endemol . those companies do a great job , but they can not be considered to be small independent studios . amendments 82 to 85 would encourage public service broadcasters to move outside the scope of those largest independent studios and to give some of their work to smaller studios , which would have significant regional benefits . new clause 1 , which was tabled by i have one last point to make about the snp amendments that has not been covered so much by other people . new clause 22 , tabled by i was watching the holocaust memorial day commemoration event on saturday night and there was a dance group , i think called chickenshed . it was the first time that i had seen on television a dance group involving someone in a wheelchair . it did not strike me how unusual that was until i saw it on television . then i thought , “ why is this not more common ? why do we not see more people who look like the general population on tv on a more regular basis ? ” that was one of those moments that brought home to me how rare it is to see people with visible physical disabilities or in wheelchairs on television at all , and certainly in a dance group . it was an amazing dance . if hon . members get the chance to look it up , it was impressive to watch and incredibly powerful . in committee , the hon . members for barnsley east and for arfon and i spoke in favour of the protection of the gaelic language and the importance of it being used as spoken in scotland on television . i mentioned the importance for places in scotland where gaelic is a very minority language . there is , for example , gaelic - medium education in aberdeen , but people in aberdeen are much less likely to be exposed to gaelic outside the education system , so things like gaelic children ’s tv are even more important in aberdeen than they are in places where gaelic is more widely spoken . they mean that children and young people can be exposed to and immersed in the language , rather than only having it for the few hours a day that they are at a gaelic playgroup or school . we continue to support what is now new clause 19 . i have had much communication from bbc alba on this and i continue to support its work . i encourage the government to do what they can to work with the scottish government , the bbc and bbc alba to ensure that the situation continues as is , and that there is clarity about the future of funding , so that everyone agrees on the importance of gaelic . to be fair to the minister in committee , he was also clear about his support for the gaelic language . agreement was very much across parties , but gaelic still does not have the prominence in the bill that we would like it to , despite the feeling in the house being in favour of it . anything that the government can do to improve the prominence of gaelic in the bill would be great . i emphasise the point that the hon . lady made earlier in respect of the gaelic language . in terms of language planning , extending the domain of a minority language is extremely important . that domain encompasses the media , including television and radio . she is perfectly right to argue for gaelic television to be picked up in aberdeen as well as in the western isles . i thank the hon . gentleman for backing up my point . i think we are very much on the same page . i am pleased at how much welsh language tv has changed and moved in recent years . i congratulate him on his personal work to ensure that that happened . he was very clear about the history in committee , and it was incredibly interesting to learn about that . i support the amendments about age ratings . i agree that there should be consistency to them and that disney tends to duck its obligations , which makes it more difficult for parents to make sensible decisions . the shadow minister talked about children ’s television and the way that children access some television . children in more deprived households are less likely to have access to smartphones or online systems , and therefore the only way they can access good children ’s content may be through the public service broadcasters and their free - to - air services . i want to reinforce the shadow minister ’s point that it is incredibly important to protect those services because of the discriminatory and differential impact their loss would have on the most vulnerable children and those who are least able to access educational programming and have access only to free - to - air services as they air . it is important to protect children ’s television and ensure the provision of good - quality children ’s television . i continue to talk and think about the importance of cbbc and cbeebies when my children were young . other services are available but 10 or 12 years ago , those channels were at the centre of what children and families were watching . i hope that they continue to produce high - quality , useful and interesting programmes . sometimes we just need to sit our children down in front of the tv and have a few minutes . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] it is thoroughly recommended at times . the right hon . member for hayes and harlington tabled new clause 21 , about genres . we agree that there are issues with their removal from legislation . i hope that the government will agree at least to keep a watching brief on that and that they are willing to ensure that ofcom can change the genres covered or encourage extra genres to be added in a slightly easier way than is currently possible . the process for making changes is onerous and if problems are identified , it will be difficult for the government to walk back from the position that they are including in the bill . giving ofcom more flexibility to increase the number of genres would be helpful . let me deal with the issues about section 40 and the lack of independent regulators . i met members of hacked off yesterday . i have been speaking to the organisation throughout the bill ’s stages , and i tabled an amendment on the subject in committee . i have concerns about the government ’s position on section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 . i understand that , as the temporary minister — if that is the correct term — i spoke to an individual yesterday whose daughter had died . the seconds before the young woman passed away were filmed and posted on a national newspaper ’s website . ipso found that that was not intrusion into grief . it is against natural justice that that could happen . the individuals from hacked off and those who gave evidence to the leveson inquiry were told clearly by those in charge at the time , “ we will make changes . we will ensure that there is recourse . ” they were promised by those in the most senior positions that change would happen , yet 12 years on , those people are still waiting for any meaningful change to occur . given everything that they have been through , they should not have to continue to fight simply to get the press to behave with a little compassion and common sense . i have massive concerns about the government ’s position , and i will support the amendments that my hon . friend i have been perusing new clause 18 , which the hon . member tabled . it would establish a fund to compensate sports governing bodies for loss of income for sale of tv rights . would that be a levy on the sports governing bodies , which the government would redistribute , or would the money come from general taxation ? it is not clear how it would be paid for . i do not mean to be difficult , but the amendments are in the name of my hon . friend the member for paisley and renfrewshire north , and i was saying that he will cover the information about them . i am sure that he would be willing to take an intervention on that point and provide the answer . i have magnanimously allowed him to lead because i know very little about sport . he knows far more about it than me , so it made sense for us to divide up the amendments . i want briefly to cover terrestrial television and specifically new clause 8 , which the bill tries to strike a balance between the rights and the responsibilities of public service broadcasters . everything that the government do in regulating them is about striking that balance . they outline the recognised public service broadcasters ’ rights and their responsibilities to show certain genres and provide high - quality television . as a result of fulfilling those responsibilities , those broadcasters have the right to prominence on on - demand services . it is reasonable to consider public service broadcasters as different from other broadcasters because they have those responsibilities , which others do not share . the changes to radio are also important . it was good to hear cross - party commitment to and positivity about radio in committee . in the recent extreme weather events , people have relied on the radio . they need to know , for example , that a tree has fallen down on north anderson drive and that they can not access the haudagain slip road . my friend , who lives in oxfordshire , had no electricity because of a recent storm , and could get updates only by listening to their car radio . radio is incredibly important for resilience and i am pleased that members across the house recognised that in committee . as i have made clear , the snp will not oppose the bill on third reading . changes , which are long overdue , need to be made . however , there are some gaps in the bill , including issues around future proofing , that have not been adequately addressed . as the shadow minister did , i thank everyone on the bill committee , particularly the hon . member for arfon . it is a pleasure to speak in the debate about this important legislation , and to hear cross - party support for the bill and the work done in committee , on second reading , in which i took part , and now on report . i warmly welcome the bill and the work done by the minister for media , tourism and creative industries and her team , as well as by the interim minister , i will focus on new clause 8 , which i tabled . the new clause looks at what is not in the bill and what has been omitted , which i hope the minister will consider during her summing up and in the bill ’s remaining stages . protection for digital terrestrial television and radio broadcast services that people receive via an aerial needs to be written into the bill . new clause 8 would put in law for the first time a legal protection for these crucial life - line services . it would put a duty on the government to keep issuing multiplex licences and on ofcom to make available sufficient radio spectrum . currently , these services are guaranteed only until 2034 , with the risk that they could be switched in 2030 — in just six years . ministers hinted at second reading that these services will have a longer shelf life than 2034 , which is welcome . however , i will focus my remarks on the scottish affairs committee , of which i am a member , and our report , which i will come to , because at the committee , the minister said : “ what happens after 2034 is a live question . ” i agree that it a “ live question ” , which is why we need a live answer to the issue . i welcome the minister ’s positive comments in committee and those of the secretary of state on second reading — indeed , i quoted a speech by the secretary of state . there is a lot of positivity about what i am hearing from the government and i hope they will go a step further by taking on the conclusions i have come to in new clause 8 . no one is pushing against the tide on the growth in streaming , but terrestrial television , often referred to as freeview , and broadcast radio still account for the bulk of viewing and listening across the united kingdom . i come to the issue from a scottish angle , as i represent a scottish constituency and am a member of the scottish affairs committee , where we discussed this at length , but the issue affects people across the united kingdom . research from ipsos in 2022 showed that most adults had watched digital terrestrial television in the last year and 43 % of adults watched digital terrestrial television every week . some 76 % listened to broadcast radio weekly . “ almost a third ( 31 % ) of households in scotland only used digital terrestrial television services … to watch television in the first quarter of 2022 . ” paragraph 33 highlights correspondence to the committee from laurie patten , director of strategy and regulation at arqiva , who argued that “ scotland ’s greater rurality than the uk average , its island communities , and its comparatively older population ” make terrestrial tv services especially important in scotland . that is why we made that issue so prominent in the report . i have continued to raise the matter with ministers , and proposed new clause 8 . the hon . member for aberdeen north was right to say the issue is important not only to people in rural communities and older populations , and that it has an impact on some of the most vulnerable in society . the campaign group broadcast 2040 + has assembled a coalition of groups representing those who rely on broadcast services the most . they include older people , who rely disproportionately on terrestrial television . some 80 % of those aged 75 and above only watch their media , news and programmes through that means , and they often struggle to access ip content . age uk is a member of the coalition . their charity director , caroline abrahams , said : “ while broadcast tv and radio is enjoyed by many across the uk , it is especially important for older audiences particularly those on low incomes living alone . many older people value the current universal services and would struggle to afford alternatives such as subscriptions services . ” because they are free to air , they are also a lifeline to people on lower incomes or living in digital poverty , who often struggle to afford the additional cost of subscription streaming services and the cost of superfast broadband connections that are required to access them . elizabeth anderson , chief executive office of the digital poverty alliance said : “ for the millions living in digital poverty in the uk , tv and radio broadcast services are vital sources of news , public education and entertainment . the universality of access to broadcast services must be paramount . whilst many services have seen a rush to digital only delivery , applying this to tv and radio when so many lack the devices , skills and connectivity packages to access internet based media would simply push millions of people deeper into financial and social exclusion . ” the hon . gentleman ’s words strike a chord with me because he highlights exactly the issues in my vast , far - flung constituency . in the straths and glens of sutherland , caithness , ross and cromarty , there are many folk who can not afford such services , precisely as he is saying . i am glad he is saying what he is saying , and i am listening with very great interest . it is important that this issue is aired . the hon . gentleman represents an extremely rural part of northern scotland . my constituency is not quite so rural , but many people in moray experience similar challenges to those of his constituents in the far north . my hon . friend is making some excellent points and i am hesitant to interrupt him . although i would not sell his constituency short , my constituency is also very rural . our constituencies , in common with many of the rural constituencies in scotland , are very low down the league table of superfast broadband coverage . as much as people might be able to afford or want streaming services , they do not physically have access to them — at least , not yet . does he agree that makes his new clause even more important ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for that point and for supporting my new clause 8 . i will come on to not just the affordability but the availability of superfast broadband to get streaming services . i highlight the importance of broadcast services for rural constituents , including mine in moray , as well as those of my hon . friend “ issue of safeguarding dtt and radio is of fundamental importance to rural areas where the population is much older than the national average and the least well served by broadband connectivity . we strongly support the broadcast 2040 + campaign . ” i have been extremely encouraged by the work of that campaign to get some movement from the government on the issue . as my hon . friend the member for banff and buchan highlighted , the issue of broadband connectivity is of huge concern to constituents in his area , as well as in my moray constituency . large parts of scotland and rural areas around the uk do not have reliable , high - speed broadband , so streaming tv is not an option . i have little confidence that the problem will be solved by 2040 , particularly given some of the problems we have seen with the roll - out of the r100 programme in scotland . even if that roll - out succeeds , all the targets are met and high - speed broadband is delivered across the country , the other measure that we must look at is broadband take - up . ey has recently undertaken a study on that , predicting that regardless of whether high - speed broadband is rolled out , more than 5.5 million properties in the uk will still not have a high - speed broadband subscription in 2040 — well beyond 2034 as specified by my new clause . the report makes a number of other worrying findings and paints a compelling picture of the genuine dependence that millions of the most vulnerable members of our society have on broadcast services to stay connected and in touch . any move towards an online - only system of tv distribution , without the option of digital terrestrial television , would put a significant group of people at risk of being left behind . as for why i have tabled new clause 8 and why am i looking for certainty from the government , both they and ofcom are conducting reviews of the tv market . ministers have urged us to await those findings , but 2034 is not far away and if these services are to remain , it is crucial that we attract investment and ensure that they remain commercially viable . to do that , as the hon . member for aberdeen north correctly said , they need certainty from the government . the danger is that without that longer - term certainty , beyond 2034 , where the minister has accepted there is a live question , broadcasters might run down their services and the technology might not be updated . if they get certainty from the government , they can put in investment to ensure people are not without these crucial services and are not left isolated . if the commercial viability of the service is lost while millions of people are still relying on it , there is a real risk that , perversely , the government would have to step in and use taxpayers ’ money to keep the service going . my constructive proposal would not only help keep people connected but , in the long run , perhaps save taxpayers ’ money . surely it is better to provide the longer - term guarantee now that would enable that investment and deliver a good - quality , universal service for years to come . i thank the minister , the interim minister and the secretary of state and others who have listened to my concerns on this issue . i met the minister just last week and i will continue the dialogue on this , because it is a crucial element that we should be debating in this house . i hope we will get some movement from the government . as my right hon . friend first , may i apologise for my late arrival to the debate , madam deputy speaker ? i seriously underestimated hon . members ’ capacity for brevity on the previous business . this afternoon , i would like to speak to my new clause 15 and to refer briefly to new clause 1 and clause 28 . i thank my hon . friend order . it will not be possible for the hon . gentleman to refer to new clause 1 , because he was not here to move it at the beginning . he is fine to speak to new clause 15 . thank you for that guidance , madam deputy speaker . new clause 15 seeks to establish a broadcasting and communications authority for wales . that new independent body would have responsibility for and oversight of broadcasting and media matters in wales , seeking to reflect the needs of welsh audiences . under my new clause , a shadow authority would fulfil the functions of that body before its establishment 12 months after the passing of this act . the report by the independent commission on the constitutional future of wales recommended that move . some members will know that the commission was set up by the welsh government and is under the chairmanship of the former archbishop of canterbury , rowan williams . it reported last week , and one of its conclusions was that there is a need to look at the devolution of broadcasting . an independent authority to regulate would be an integral part of that provision . recent events have shown that there is a real need for such an authority in wales . some members will know about the internal issues at s4c , the welsh language channel , which make the argument that the current broadcasting framework is unsustainable . i worry about the relatively low interest from the department for culture , media and sport in this matter . the bill gives the secretary of state further decision - making powers , but if successive ministers refuse to meet the chair of s4c , as has happened , i worry that they can not be trusted to make the right decisions in respect of that broadcaster . my hon . friend is making a compelling case , and the events of the past week involving the commission vindicate the position he has taken . the recent difficulties in s4c have been very damaging for the channel . my firm view is that if the matter had been in the hands of welsh government ministers and the senedd , which can provide scrutiny and accountability , we would not have got to the damaging state we are in . i thank my hon . friend for that point , with which i entirely agree . even welsh conservative members concede that the arguments for reserving powers over broadcasting have been undermined by what has happened , and by the department ’s actions — or inactions . we are concerned about s4c , and its funding has plummeted since 2010 . the decision to fund it through the licence fee led to a 40 % reduction in staff . in 2015 , its chief executive officer , ian jones , warned about the effects of huge funding cuts and called for “ tegwch ” or fair play . that was a valuable contribution from him . s4c ’s independence is clearly at stake . we need to remember that there was a substantial and hard - fought campaign during the 1970s to establish the channel . indeed , we had a discussion about that in committee , in which am i correct in remembering that the conservatives had promised a separate channel in their manifesto , and had broken that promise until gwynfor evans threatened his hunger strike ? i thank the hon . gentleman for making that point ; that is what i am coming on to . however , a further argument arises from that unhappy episode , as i will show by quoting from the cabinet papers . they state that the then home secretary , the late willie whitelaw , said that the government “ would withdraw its plans to share welsh language programmes between two television channels . instead the programmes would , for an experimental period of three years , be broadcast on one channel as had been proposed in the party manifesto . ” that is the point that the hon . gentleman was making . what is more interesting is that the papers say that willie whitelaw “ still thought that the previous plans were preferable but he had agreed to change them in response to representations , put to him by lord cledwyn and others , of the views of informed and responsible people in wales . ” the interesting point is the reference to “ the views of informed and responsible people in wales . ” in fact , in the same cabinet meeting , the secretary of state for wales said : “ gwynfor evans , the leader of plaid cymru , was threatening to go on what he called a ‘ hunger strike ’ ” , before going on to say that there could be “ much tension and unpleasantness in wales later in the year , if he persisted in this intention , and there would be a danger that plaid cymru would fall into the hands of extreme left wing leaders ” , mentioning no names . however , later on in the cabinet papers , the secretary of state for wales said that it had been made clear in the press that the change been made in response to “ moderate opinion following very wide consultation in wales . ” that is the point i want to make . the argument i am making for a welsh broadcasting authority reflects settled and responsible opinion in wales . as i said , the constitutional convention has met and taken evidence very widely over two years , and has come to the conclusion that broadcasting should be devolved to wales . i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for giving way and for giving us a history lesson on the hard work of gwynfor evans . anybody who is interested in this period in the history of wales should watch the great drama that s4c recently commissioned on the life of gwynfor evans , and this campaign in particular . i was at crymych rugby club at the weekend with rhodri john , the actor who portrayed gwynfor in the drama . i can indeed recommend that production for anybody to have a look at ; it is very interesting . i can also recommend the biography of gwynfor evans , which makes similar points . the media industry in wales is more than s4c. we have fantastic production companies , including cwmni da in my constituency , news outlets and radio — all kinds of things . the proposed authority would unite the media landscape in wales under one regulatory roof and safeguard it from harms , including from large conglomerates . it would also focus on areas that are important to the people of wales . the labour welsh government ’s expert panel on a shadow broadcasting and communications authority for wales proposed that public interest journalism , sports and children ’s media be areas of specific focus due to their cultural significance , position in relation to welsh language ambitions and impact on long - term sustainability , among other reasons . the welsh government therefore propose a shadow broadcasting and communications authority for wales . i look to those on the labour front bench , as potentially the next government , to give us reassurance that it is their intention to establish that authority , as well as the intention of the welsh labour government in cardiff . wales needs to have a say on its own media landscape to ensure that what works for us is what we get . prominent commentators such as professor tom o’malley and mike birtwistle have said that s4c should be built on shared principles of social partnership , public interest and democratic pluralism ; that is , as they say , the welsh political tradition . an independent regulator for wales would be better equipped to regulate , defend and promote our national broadcasting and media industry in wales and ensure that those values are represented . that is my argument in favour of a broadcasting authority . i will say a few words on the prominence of s4c on the selection services — a point that i also raised in committee . s4c ’s content must be readily discoverable and prominent on television services , but i seek assurances that the “ appropriate degree of prominence ” will not lead to the limiting of s4c ’s coverage to specific audiences , thereby depriving people of a wide range of broadcasts . this language matches that of the electronic programme guides code , which allowed s4c to be on channel 166 on virgin media in wales until 2021 . the government should provide clear principles to guide ofcom in drawing up the new prominence code , so that public service broadcasters ’ designated internet programming services appear prominently and are easily discoverable on screens . i rise to support new clause 6 and amendment 17 , both in my name . the bill is a substantial piece of legislation and i fully support what the government are seeking to do through it to bridge the gap in regulation between linear television and internet - based on - demand platforms . nobody would argue against the principle that we want to protect children from watching age - inappropriate or harmful content . that is , after all , why parliament over many years has brought in legislation that mandates age ratings on cinema releases , restrictions on children buying dvds and videos and , importantly , until the relatively recent past , a watershed for broadcast tv . the watershed , of course , ensures that programmes broadcast before 9 pm are generally suitable for children . however , now that the vast majority of content watched by children and adults is accessed through on - demand streaming services , the watershed has become increasingly redundant . it does not matter if a programme was originally broadcast live after the watershed ; once it is available to stream online , it can be viewed by anyone of any age at any time . that is why we urgently need to apply the same standards of child protection to on - demand video as we do to cinema releases , physical dvds and linear tv . while a time - based watershed clearly can not be adapted for video on demand services , we are very fortunate in this country to have world - class expertise in applying age ratings to video content . the british board of film classification has been empowered by parliament , through the secretary of state , to apply age ratings across all cinema and dvd releases in the uk . the bbfc does an excellent job of this , as colleagues have mentioned , and is a global leader in its field . it has produced a system of age ratings that the vast majority of the british population recognises , trusts and understands . importantly , its ratings are based on regular consultation with thousands of people across britain to ensure that they meet audience expectations . we have the relevant age rating expertise already in this country , but as it stands , the bill will not make use of that expertise . amendment 17 would address this matter very simply by explicitly requiring ofcom to consult the bbfc when drawing up the video on demand code . the code will set the rules for streaming platforms , including in relation to age ratings . why would we not want to ensure that our world - renowned , government - appointed experts are consulted as part of that ? there was a similar amendment to the online safety act 2023 that required ofcom to consult with the children ’s commissioner , and i can see no argument against applying the same principle here . getting age ratings right is incredibly important , as they will likely become one of the main audience protection measures that platforms employ and will , of course , future - proof the bill . if parents do not trust the ratings , they will ignore them , and we will then not achieve our aim of protecting children . that brings me to new clause 6 in my name , which is similar to the amendment tabled by my hon . friend i am very supportive of the theme of my hon . friend ’s amendment . she made an extremely important point about consistency for parents . those of us who are lucky enough to have children find ourselves in a forest of different media that they consume , some of which seem to decide the rules and ratings on their own — of course , there are websites to go to for third - party reference . does she agree that it would be sensible to have a standardised view for parents , to manage consumption by their children , as it is the parents ’ primary duty to manage that ? we have seen in the past that the wider media industry will constantly push the boundary to try to get more under the wire for consumption by younger and younger people , such as in the deterioration of the watershed on terrestrial television . if an organisation such as the bbfc sets the tone and the standard , that must apply online as much as offline . i agree with every word . the very important factor behind the bbfc is that parents trust it . it even has an app to search for any film or dvd , and it will tell parents not only the rating but exactly why it is there — swearing , violence or whatever . that detailed knowledge is crucial not only to gain parents ’ trust but to create an industry standard , as my right hon . friend said . if we have no industry standard , some companies will try to get around the requirements if there is a commercial advantage . the bill should set out exactly that . the bill lists age ratings as one of the options that tier 1 platforms , such as the providers we have talked about , can use to comply with their audience protection requirements , but it shies away from setting the minimum standard that my right hon . friend just mentioned for what those ratings should be . the bill is right to recognise that there can not be a one - size - fits - all approach . research has shown that audiences have different expectations of video on demand services than they do of those operated by public service broadcasters . but where age ratings are in use , is it not common sense to expect a consistent standard ? my hon . friend the member for south west devon talked about disney+ and the fact that the film “ avatar ” has a 16 - plus rating , even though most parents would think it suitable for much younger children , whereas a series that has scenes of sexual coercion is apparently suitable for nine - plus . the outcome is that parents just turn off the security settings , because they do not trust the ratings . how are parents supposed to understand and apply them if they are not consistent across different platforms and providers ? new clause 6 would set a minimum standard for tier 1 providers that choose to use age ratings , by allowing them to use either the bbfc ’s system or one of equivalent transparency , clarity , rigour and objectivity that has been approved by ofcom . the new clause does not seek to mandate the bbfc system , although research has found that 90 % of uk parents want on - demand age ratings to be consistent with those for cinema and dvd . rather , it would set a minimum standard across platforms that parents can trust . we have proof already that that works . netflix and prime video have both voluntarily set up innovative partnerships to include bbfc ratings in their content . that kind of collaboration is in the interests of everyone — parents , children and the platforms themselves . it shows that this can be done without high costs or a reduction in consistency . but the reluctance of disney+ and others to follow suit shows why this kind of regulation is needed . the bbfc ’s system fits the government ’s own definition of best practice for age ratings . it would surely be preferable for all platforms to follow the example of netflix and amazon , but we do not need to be overly prescriptive in imposing solutions . instead , i ask the government to accept that it is the role of parliament — not ofcom — to set minimum standards to ensure the protection of children from harm . new clause 6 would achieve that by requiring tier 1 platforms to apply either the age rating classification system used by the bbfc or a system based on a transparent set of appropriate standards applied consistently . if this house really wants to protect children and wishes to see a trusted , effective regulatory landscape , it is hard to envisage what objections there might be to this provision . my amendments are focused on that specific aspect of the bill , but they speak to my wider concern about the approach to digital media regulation in recent years . in both this bill and the online safety act 2023 , on which i worked with colleagues across the house and in the other place to secure strengthening amendments , we have given far too much power to ofcom — not enforcement powers , which are needed , but the responsibility to determine regulatory policy . in this bill , as in the online safety act , parliament is setting out only the very basic principles through legislation , leaving it up to ofcom to draft and consult upon the vast majority of the detail . i have nothing against ofcom as an organisation — we must have an official regulator to ensure that broadcasters and providers adhere to standards required by law . however , when it comes to setting policy , i subscribe to the perhaps old - fashioned notion that it is our job as elected members of parliament . we can not leave something so important up to the consultations of an unelected body , especially when the vested interests at play are so substantial . as other hon . members have mentioned , once we pass the bill , parliament will not get another chance to set the parameters of the video on demand code , so we must ensure that the final text of the bill sets out what parliament believes to be the appropriate standards of audience protection . sadly , my concerns in this area are well founded . in the recently enacted online safety act 2023 , parliament decided that age verification checks for sites and platforms hosting pornography must be “ highly effective ” to address the significant problem of young children accessing violent pornography on social media and websites . “ highly effective ” is an outcome measure . just trying hard to prevent children from accessing pornography does not make a platform compliant under that act . compliance means actually stopping under-18s from coming across porn . in other words , this bill requires effective outcome measures and must not give prizes to the tech companies just for taking part . yet in the draft consultation that it published last month , ofcom does not set out what the “ highly effective ” standard means , so platforms and users are none the wiser when it comes to what does and does not meet the required legislative standard . instead , the consultation outlines the kind of activities that ofcom would like to see , rather than the outcomes that it demands . given that parliament has tasked ofcom with adjudicating on what meets the “ highly effective ” standard , failing to set a clear definition is completely unacceptable . if ofcom fails to meet the highly effective outcome standards that are clearly laid out in the 2023 act , it will leave itself open to judicial review from those who take the view that the will of parliament is serious and who wish to see age verification applied in a way that makes children safe . that very concerning but current example demonstrates what may sadly happen to the measures in the bill if parliament leaves it to ofcom to decide what constitutes effective age ratings for video on demand services . we can not say that we were not warned . i do not intend to press my amendments to a vote , because i very much appreciate the secretary of state ’s continued engagement , but i urge the minister and their lordships to consider the principle of the amendments . they are designed to set minimum standards for child protection , which are currently lacking . that is our responsibility as legislators , so let us do it thoroughly . i rise to commend my new clause 16 to the house , and to speak to new clauses 17 and 18 , and amendments 79 and 80 . this summer will again see scotland again in the finals of the men ’s european championships in germany . thanks to listing , every game from the finals will be available free to air on the bbc and stv / itv . however , once this summer ’s euro 2024 final concludes and scotland have safely tucked away the henri delaunay trophy in the hampden trophy cabinet , we will be back to the current set - up , which will maintain a paywall for the scotland men ’s national team games . last april , i hosted a roundtable summit on how to make progress on getting all of scotland ’s national team matches on free - to - air tv . two things were clear : as it stood , that would not be an easy or quick fix , with umpteen moving parts and vested interests in the room ; however , there was also a willingness to look realistically at what could be done with the right will and resources . we saw how grassroots participation rates in english cricket slumped when the england and wales cricket board signed a deal with sky and put almost the entirety of the first - class game behind a paywall . the lack of public interest was such that the ecb effectively had to invent an entire competition , purely for terrestrial television , as a shop window for the sport . i assume that we are all aware of the billie jean king quote : “ you have to see it to be it . ” no one at the scottish football association , stv , viaplay , the bbc , uefa or anywhere else involved in football rights is sitting there plotting to do in scottish football fans . they are all rational actors , working within the system created by the uk government and uefa to achieve their own goals . the hon . gentleman is talking about the unanimity of opinion . i should tell the house that the welsh affairs committee , the culture , media and sport committee , and the senedd ’s culture , communications , welsh language , sport and international relations committee have all called for the six nations rugby tournament to remain free to air for broadcasting . indeed , the welsh conservatives have a whole senedd debate on that matter tomorrow . last week , i met a senior executive from bbc cymru wales , who said that losing the six nations , for example , which is currently shared with itv , will be a blow both to the bbc and to the audience . i will come to the potential issue facing the six nations a bit later in my speech , but in the meantime , i am very much looking forward to visiting cardiff this saturday to watch scotland beat wales in that very competition . will the hon . gentleman give way ? on that ? it is just that the hon . gentleman ’s extensive list of events neglects to mention cricket . i wondered whether there was a reason why he had excluded cricket from his list . all i have sought to add to the list is the six nations competition and any and all qualification matches for all home nations ’ national football teams . as the hon . gentleman will be aware , i am indeed a fan of cricket , which is probably not a majority position in scotland . it is obviously not one of the main sports in scotland at this time , although the snp will be backing amendment 88 , tabled by will the hon . member give way ? i was going to go back to football , but i feel that we are staying on cricket , so i will . i thank the hon . member for his generous remarks . whether it is cricket , football or whatever , getting people to watch sport in the way that is being advocated so strongly means that they might become more inclined to take part in that sport themselves , which could ultimately improve the health of scotland and the health of the nation . the hon . gentleman makes an excellent point : the power of sport is simply huge . participating is obviously the best thing for the health of the nation , but viewing a sport — whatever sport it is — is likely to drive up participation rates . we have seen the opposite with the england and wales cricket board and the sky contract . if i can cycle back to football for a second , the problem for scottish football fans is that sometimes the goals of those involved — again , i am talking about uefa , the bbc , viaplay and all the stakeholders — do not coincide with maximising access . what is needed is a change to the system that would change those goals for the better for our fans . the system is currently short - changing fans in scotland , while elsewhere on these isles , it is a very different story . football fans in england enjoy free - to - air coverage of their national team via the current deal with channel 4 and the forthcoming deal with itv . viewers in wales enjoy free - to - air coverage of their national team thanks to s4c ’s sub - licensed welsh language coverage , and viewers in northern ireland get free coverage of the republic of ireland via rté broadcasts — while many in northern ireland welcome that , i appreciate that , for others , it is akin to having england games broadcast in scotland on channel 4 and stv . scottish fans , though , are left with the prospect of paying subscription providers to see their team in action . that is very unlikely to change without amending legislation to level the playing field for scottish supporters . similarly , these days , we are used to murmurings about the six nations being moved from its current home on the bbc and stv / itv to behind a paywall . the airtime available to rugby union fans on free - to - air tv is already incredibly low : last year ’s world cup was a four - yearly aberration . as we all know , the six nations is a ratings winner and rugby ’s big annual shop window to the wider public and the players of the future . even old relics like me can be convinced to play again — although , having tried to do so last year , it would have been very much for the better if i had not . middle youth ? stupidity , not a mid - life crisis — yet . italian supporters are guaranteed to see their team on free - to - air tv ; ireland supporters will see their team on free tv , as will france supporters ; but scotland , wales and england supporters face watching a blank screen if the rights are allowed to lapse into subscription tv ’s hands . the welsh affairs committee , which has already been mentioned and on which my hon . friend “ the government adds the six nations to group a of the listed sporting events , to ensure its status on terrestrial tv . ” obviously , that is proposed in new clause 16 . these islands will host the men ’s euro 2028 championships , and there is a reasonable chance that all five countries might qualify . viewers in england , ireland and wales will be able to see their teams live and in full throughout the qualifying campaign without paying a penny — beyond the licence fee , in case anybody wanted to challenge me on that . my amendment would guarantee that right to all across these isles through a simple amendment of the existing legislation , extending the protections that exist to protect “ events of national interest ” , in the words of the 1996 act . scotland ’s journey in the past few years under stevie clark has shown how much interest there is across scotland , and it is time that the legislation reflected that . i am grateful to labour , plaid cymru and the liberal democrats for their support for the new clause . i hope that tory back benchers who have been espousing the power of sport and arguing that sport should be shown on free - to - air tv will join us in the lobby this evening . new clause 18 , the related amendment , is designed to prevent any detriment below a certain annual revenue level to governing bodies and organisations that have their events listed and broadcast outside subscription paywalls . i know from my extensive discussions with governing bodies that they are in something of a bind . on the one hand , they support their sport and want to see it in front of as many eyeballs as possible — and perhaps , on a cynical level , to have as many eyeballs as possible in front of perimeter advertising as well . on the other hand , they receive a decent whack of cash for the tv rights — funds that go into developing the sport and supporting the grassroots — and that might well take a severe knock if the value of the rights is cut through listing in group a. i fully understand that sports broadcasting rights inflation has been significant over the last decade and more . i understand that it is difficult for an stv to make a winning bid for scotland rights commercially viable , due to the size of the tv market in scotland . that is made harder still by the fact that uefa has bundled scottish international football rights with those of wales and northern ireland to try and draw larger bids and more money for itself and the national associations . although the same rights inflation has impacted the bbc , it does not have the same commercial considerations as an stv or an itv . i appreciate , however , that tory culture wars have inflicted severe damage to the funding levels available to the bbc in recent years . however , the bbc is required to serve all audiences across the whole of the uk , including provision for those in the nations and regions . from a sporting point of view , that simply does not happen . we do not know how much the bbc paid to secure , yet again , the rights to “ match of the day ” , but we do know that it is a huge sum that takes up a huge proportion of bbc sport ’s budget . despite the figures not being available , it does not take a genius to ascertain that per - capita spending to secure english sports rights vastly dwarfs that which is spent on scottish sports rights . incidentally , i do not blame bbc scotland for that ; the blame lies firmly at bbc network ’s door . it would seem that the approach by the network is to let scottish football fans eat english cake . if bbc scotland were afforded the per - capita sums used to secure england football rights , scotland would be in a far better position to bid for , and secure , scotland international rights . or , indeed , if bbc alba ’s funding was anywhere near the levels of per - capita support offered to s4c , that would very likely allow bbc alba to secure secondary sub - licensed free - to - air gaelic coverage . in lieu of any action to address this , new clause 18 would attempt to solve the funding gap by providing financial support to governing bodies , who could rely on that revenue stream to offset any loss of income caused by group a listing . that is a proportionate , cost - effective way of ensuring that there is no detriment from listing , while limiting access to the fund to those who actually need it , rather than those organisations that are already awash with cash . of course , governing bodies in the devolved nations , being much smaller , are hugely hit by being part of a large uk broadcast market but a very small domestic market . to address the question that in committee , the interim minister or temporary minister , or whatever title “ the subject - matter of the broadcasting act 1990 and the broadcasting act 1996 ” are reserved to westminster . if it were up to me , schedule 5 and its list of powers reserved to this place would be deleted in its entirety , but there we are . if the 1996 act is entirely reserved to westminster , so must be the financial implications of measures enacted under that amended act . it is not up to the scottish government to fix the consequences of the uk government ’s broken devolution system , and it is entirely in order that the uk government compensate governing bodies and others whose income falls below a threshold if it drops as a result of listing . taken together , new clauses 16 and 18 would not only give group a listing a firm moral footing , but give rights holders a firm financial footing . surely that is a win for everyone , including this government . i will touch briefly on my other amendments . new clause 17 would place the gaelic media service , which in partnership with the bbc provides the bbc alba channel , on the same statutory footing as its welsh counterpart in the s4c authority , which oversees the welsh language channel . when the 1996 act was passed , gaelic broadcasting was restricted to opt - outs on the two bbc channels and through stv and grampian ’s schedules . mg alba , which the gaelic media service now operates as , did not exist . television was entirely analogue , and gaelic and welsh language broadcasting were restricted to scotland and wales only . my new clause would simply ensure that gaelic language broadcasting has parity with welsh language broadcasting when it comes to the consideration of listed events . it would be an utter nonsense to say that speakers of gaelic have less of an interest in seeing sports on free - to - air tv than their welsh - speaking counterparts , yet that is what the current legislation implies . bbc alba has developed a reputation for high - quality sports coverage since its inception . it therefore has a strategic interest in where sporting rights go , simply because it has invested a great deal of time and money into securing some of those rights and broadcasting the sports free to air not just in scotland , but across these isles . on the broadcast 2040 + campaign , i welcome the pledges made by the interim minister in committee , and i am sure that the current minister will back that up . in response to that campaign for digital terrestrial broadcasting to continue for many years to come , my hon . friend however , pledges made by ministers have a tendency to become pliable when circumstances make it easier to slide away from the original commitments . amendments 79 and 80 would simply place into legislation a compulsory requirement for public service broadcasters to continue using digital terrestrial television to deliver their services . i can see no reason why that would be incompatible with those ministerial promises , which is why i see no reason for the government not to accept my amendments . broadcast television has worked and , as the cliché has it , “ if it ai n’t broke , do n’t fix it . ” my amendments would keep the government from fixing a problem that simply does not exist at this point , and i commend those amendments , as well as the other new clauses and amendments to which i have spoken , to the house . i would like to address a number of the amendments we have been discussing — some i support , some i oppose . let me start on a positive note with new clause 7 , which was tabled by the father of the house , my hon . friend there are practical examples of how that change would make a difference . at the olympic games in tokyo , the gold - winning performance by bmx specialist charlotte worthington was watched by only 400,000 people because it took place in the middle of the night , yet in the days that followed , different forms of short - form coverage of the race generated a nearly tenfold increase in views . it is not just about time - shifting ; that can also happen just because that is how people absorb content these days . for instance , for the 2022 commonwealth games in birmingham , the tv reach was about 20 % lower than for the 2014 games in glasgow , but there were about six times more on - demand views of digital clips . the problem is that without enhanced regulatory protection , what should be shared national moments risk being lost to many people behind a paywall . this bill is a genuine opportunity to safeguard the future of listed events , as they are now viewed , for future generations . as it stands , the bill offers no protection for digital on - demand rights , yet , as i said , that is now a key way in which many people consume such events . i support the new clause because it would ensure that , where possible , adequate digital on - demand coverage of listed events , such as those clips and excerpts , is made available free of charge to audiences in the united kingdom . i pray in aid the culture , media and sport committee , of which i am a member . when we looked at this question , we concluded : “ digital rights should be included as part of the listed events regime to reflect sweeping changes in how audiences consume content since the original legislation was passed . we recommend that the government includes provisions in the bill to enable digital rights to be included in the listed events regime without the need for further primary legislation . ” i know the government recognise the issue and have consulted the industry about it , but a year later they have not yet reported on the findings of their review . if those protections were brought in , they would broadly mirror the framework that currently provides protection for live coverage . the new clause seeks to ensure that , where rights holders grant rights for digital on - demand coverage , it is not done on an exclusive basis and there is an opportunity for audiences in the uk to enjoy that coverage for free . i appreciate that my hon . friend the member for worthing west has said he will not press his new clause to a vote at this stage , but i hope the minister is listening and that the government will take this away and move an amendment in the other place that meets the needs that my hon . friend is trying to meet . i also support amendment 78 , tabled by my right hon . friend reverting to the substance of the amendment , local tv is an increasingly important part of the landscape . it is still very small scale , by its definition , and it has had a rocky past , but there is clearly a market and a demand for it , and it is increasingly becoming part of the broadcasting landscape . the only thing i would add , since the amendment was spoken to so well by my right hon . friend , is that it must apply to genuinely local stations . it is important to establish that caveat . i absolutely agree with my right hon . friend about local television . people talk about specified channels and programmes for languages , but there are many areas , such as my constituency and his , where it is important that local viewers get a chance to see their specific areas and discussions relevant to them , rather than just regional television . that is why it is important that local television should be included . i completely agree with my hon . friend . there are distinct markets for regional tv and local tv . in some parts of the country the regions are so large that large parts of what national broadcasters tend to regard as local tv are not local to people and do not register with their interests , whereas local tv can genuinely do that , as local radio does and has always done . i wish to speak in support of the various government amendments that cover radio , not least because parts 5 and 6 of the bill are particularly important in enhancing the prospects of radio flourishing in future . many people have been predicting radio ’s demise for some time , but the sector is doing strongly . i hope that will continue , and anything that encourages that in the bill is extremely welcome . some of the amendments remove an out - of - date requirement on ofcom to impose fines on national analogue stations such as talksport if they sought to terminate the broadcasting of analogue transmissions before the end of their licence period . i do not think there are any plans for that to happen , but it seems sensible to make such flexibility available , not least because analogue transmission and listening is becoming increasingly rare . some 76 % of listening to commercial radio is now on digital platforms , and looking ahead to the future seems perfectly sensible . amendments 53 to 59 that would ensure a dcms consultation before regulations that affect a radio selection service are also sensible . the measures restate the need to ensure access through voice activated smart - speakers — a massively growing and important part of radio listening — and the big tech companies that make and operate those speakers , and which also provide content , clearly need a strong regulatory regime to stop any abuse of the market power that those big companies have . this has been a significant debate . we also had it in the culture , media and sport committee , and it is important that the regulatory regime recognises the reality of where power lies in modern broadcasting . moving to amendments that i am less keen on , i agree with the news media association that the argument for state - backed regulation of the press has been lost , and the amendments introduced eloquently and with great sincerity by my right hon . friend rose — i suspected that might happen . my right hon . friend will know that the royal charter on self - regulation of the press , which the conservative party established , is still alive and well , and the government have no plans for its dissolution . my right hon . friend ’s amendment seeks to revive the argument from more than 10 years ago , but i think that argument has gone . the world has moved on and the press has moved on . we had a discussion about whether regulation or the application of the law is the appropriate way to do this , and i submit that the reason why press behaviour has changed is simply the effective application of the law , and the fact that many newspaper groups have had to pay huge amounts of money because they broke the law in behaving the way they did 10 , 15 and 20 years ago . that led to the change in behaviour . where my right hon . friend and i would come closer together is on slapp cases , and the need for legislation to allow individuals not to be intimidated by rich publishing companies . i know the government have committed to introducing legislation to see those sorts of cases dismissed at the earliest possible stage , and i urge my colleagues on the front bench to do that as soon as possible . while i am in sceptical mode , i similarly question the need for the various new clauses , proposed by members in all parts of the house , that would mandate a more rigid system of age classifications for programmes already regulated by ofcom . i absolutely get the intention behind them , which is to protect children from unsuitable content , but i am instinctively wary of suggestions that would mean one regulator having to consult another before introducing a code of conduct . ofcom has considerable powers , and it can operate those powers . i do not think it sensible to try to tie this down to any particular age classification system , not least because some public service broadcasters , who are pretty responsible in not trying to expose content that is unsuitable for children , operate systems of protection that do not rely on age classification . itv has its guidance system , and many broadcasters operate a system involving a pin that sensible parents will keep from their children so that they can be protected at home . is that not exactly the point ? we have world - class regulation in the british board of film classification , which gives us a benchmark . a good arrangement would be for broadcasters and other platforms to register with an organisation like the bbfc and have to pay a registration fee , and for the regulator to regulate that rather than the other way round . my right hon . friend talks about responsible parents , but we need to guide the people who do not know what to look for , who are not media - savvy , and who need some guidance . even our public service broadcasters do not always get it right , and sometimes there is content that really should not be seen by those aged 15 and under . i take my hon . friend ’s point , but i return to my original point . given that the bill and indeed our whole regulatory structure are based on ofcom , and given that the bill seeks to give ofcom proper powers to provide , in this instance , protection for children in an appropriate way , introducing another different system would , i suspect , lead to more confusion rather than less . that is precisely what the bill will do : it will introduce a different system . at present ofcom is responsible for regulating the public service broadcasters , which it does through the watershed , and the bbfc is responsible for dvds and cinema . we now have a completely new landscape which resembles the dvd landscape much more closely because it is available on demand . it is therefore sensible to introduce an age - rating system based roughly on what the bbfc does , because the bbfc , not ofcom , is the expert in that field . i fear that we may go down a rabbit hole . ofcom is the expert in that field , but the system is based on film classification . the age - rating system is designed for a situation where a person goes through a door and someone makes a guess whether that person was 16 or 18 or 12 , for instance . will my right hon . friend give way again ? i will give my hon . friend one more go . i take my right hon . friend ’s point . however , the bbfc classifies not just films but items that are streamed directly and never released in cinemas by tagging every rateable incident , such as a swear word or an episode of violence , and uses that system to come up with a verifiable , standardised rating that everyone understands . it is exactly the same process as the one that is used to verify a video on demand , and it is what netflix already uses to rate its own videos . netflix uses it , but , as my hon . friend herself said earlier , disney does not . there will of course be differences . i think that overregulating will just lead to disadvantages for people who are trying to produce content , and that insisting on one system that is partly designed for one mode of operation may well not work for another operation . if ofcom does its job effectively it will achieve what we all want to see , which is age - inappropriate content not being available to children . as i have said , involving more than one regulator normally leads to confusion and worse regulation than would have existed otherwise . as i say , a number of the amendments are wholly desirable , and i hope that the government adopt them ; others are less so , and i hope that the government will resist them . i close by saying that this is a very good bill , long overdue , and i wish it well in its future stages . it is an honour to follow i welcome the position taken by labour front benchers , who have said they will support amendment 2 . i am delighted that they have been listening to those of us who have been involved in this issue for a number of years and who have supported the work of hacked off . i claim only a minor supporting role ; other opposition members have done far more than i have . none the less , i have been at those meetings and in those discussions . at times , i have taken part in debates in which i have committed to support the aims and objectives of people who have been fighting hard through hacked off , and i am delighted that we are not closing the door on them completely today . i commend then there is the issue of the carrot . many of us have taken part in debates in this place about slapp orders , which enable those with a great deal of wealth at their disposal to abuse our legal system in order to shut down independent reporting that exposes wrongdoing and shines a light into the places that need it . my hon . friend underestimates his own role in this area , which has been very strong . i suspect that , like me , he wishes that we were seeing section 40 commenced rather than repealed today , as i am sure do the mccanns , the dowlers , christopher jefferies and all the other historical victims of press abuses . given that we are going for the carrot rather than the stick — the carrot is better than nothing — can my hon . friend explain why there is not universal support for that across the house ? i will leave it to others to explain why they are adopting their position , but i do take issue with some of the assertions that have been made by some government members , who say that the current system is an improvement on what we had before . as i pointed out earlier , the ipso system received over 14,000 complaints in 2021 , but only 88 of them , or 0.6 % , were upheld — less than 1 % . i challenge anyone to say that it is a satisfactory situation to have so few complaints upheld . i met a mother , mandy garner , for the first time yesterday . her daughter was killed in a hit - and - run . in the 24 hours after mandy was given the news and tried to relay it to her family , the daily mail went down to the scene of the crime and managed to purchase cctv footage from a nearby shop that showed the accident taking place . the daily mail did not actually show the moment of impact in the media , but within that 24 hours , it posted that recording for people to watch under a clickbait headline . that happened in 2020 , 10 years after hacked off started its campaign . mandy described her experience in an article : “ the daily mail published the cctv footage of my daughter ’s last moments the morning after her death with a lurid clickbait headline — just as we were trying to explain to our other children what had happened . i complained that it was an intrusion into grief and therefore in breach of ipso ’s code on this . i thought it was an open and closed case . clearly , it was a breach . if it was n’t , what actually would constitute a breach ? ” months of to - ing and fro - ing with the daily mail followed , while mandy was mourning her daughter . she went on : “ eventually … ipso ruled that it was not a breach of their code . one of the reasons given was that you could n’t make out my daughter ’s face because the footage was ‘ grainy ’ ” . there was nothing about how the footage would impact on the people who knew what had happened and knew who was involved , or about the family ’s concern that the brothers and sisters of the young woman who had died would see the footage . if that is a satisfactory complaint system , i fail to understand what people think we were seeking to achieve when we went through all of leveson and supported setting up the royal commission . these issues continue to occur . the calcutt report described the press complaints commission , which ipso was set up to replace , as having been “ set up by the industry , financed by the industry , dominated by the industry , and operating a code of practice devised by the industry and which is over - favourable to the industry ” . if that description of the press complaints commission is not what we see now , i do n’t know what is . for people to assert that we are in a better place under ipso is completely false and wrong . further to that , the government want to repeal section 40 in its entirety , but high - profile cases are coming down the road that will attract a great deal of public attention , and they will focus attention back on this area of press complaints and having an independent complaints system . they will call into question the decision of this house to repeal section 40 . i feel that the government are in the wrong place on this issue , which is why i support amendment 2 , tabled by i rise to speak to amendment 1 , tabled by my right hon . friend and fellow cornishman , the bill gives the government a straightforward opportunity to do something fairly simple yet tangible that would give meaning to the recognition of cornish national minority status . it is clear that cornwall has a history , heritage and culture that is distinct from england ’s , and distinct within the uk . it is unique in many ways , and we have far more in common with our celtic cousins around the fringes of the uk . we have our own language , and it has seen a revival over the last 10 or 20 years , with many schools now promoting the cornish language and holding workshops . unesco has upgraded cornish from extinct to critically endangered . it is important that we recognise and seek to continue this progress . i am grateful to my hon . friend for supporting amendment 1 . he makes a powerful case for why cornwall is unique and different . does he agree that if the bbc had due regard for the framework convention on national minorities , it would take a very different approach to local radio ? at the moment , the bbc treats cornwall like any other part of england . my right hon . friend makes a very good point that i was going to make . there is clearly a role for the bbc in helping to protect , promote and inform about cornish culture and the cornish language . measures in this bill could be strengthened to ensure that the bbc plays that role , thereby helping the government to fulfil their responsibility to give due recognition to the cornish . we have seen a revival and fresh interest in cornish culture and history in recent years , some of which is down to the hugely successful “ poldark ” series , which , for many , has brought to life the history of cornwall and its role in the industrial revolution . other programmes have also helped to put the spotlight on our unique cornish culture . i think particularly of “ the fisherman ’s apprentice ” , in which monty halls went to live in one of our very small fishing communities to highlight both the historical and modern - day struggles of such places . we are looking for programmes that present a picture of the true cornwall and our history , heritage and culture , not programmes that present the idealistic , picture - postcard view of cornwall , and that are just adverts for more second homeowners . we have rich , deep and strong heritage and culture in cornwall , which is what we want to present and protect . in this day of increased multiculturalism — i do not want to go down that rabbit hole — and with all that is happening in the world , it is important that we do everything we can to protect the uniqueness of our cornish culture . it is clear that broadcast media can play an important role in helping us to do just that , and in helping the government to give real meaning and value to the recognition of cornish national minority status in the uk . i am not calling for our own cornish station , just as scotland and wales have particular stations — i am not going that far — but more could be done to set an expectation that the bbc will give due regard to cornish protected national minority status in its public service broadcasting responsibilities . that is simply what amendment 1 would do . i understand that my right hon . friend the member for camborne and redruth does not intend to press it to a division , but i ask the minister to give careful consideration to the points that we have made , and to the purpose of the amendment , and to look carefully at whether the government can adopt the measure or something similar as a clear sign of the importance that they place on protecting and promoting our cornish culture and heritage . i agreed with all of that , except i am not quite sure how four countries can be described as a fringe . rather , i would call us the anchor holding the anglo - saxon peninsula otherwise known as england in place . during the lengthy passage of the bill , we on the snp benches have engaged with the uk government in good faith . we all want a healthy , functioning , responsible and free media . my hon . friend historically , the conservatives have expressed great support for the gaelic language . indeed , at my suggestion , the house of commons select committee on culture , media and sport , on which i sit , has launched an inquiry on the future of gaelic and other minority languages in these islands . therefore , one piece of uk government recalcitrance has been striking : why have the uk government been so resistant to making statutory mention of the gaelic language and of gaelic services ? we all agree , cross party , that this beautiful , ancient and vibrant language makes a vital contribution to our cultural life , and we know that its vastly positive impact dwarfs the miserly public expenditure on it . i come from a long line of gaelic speakers . neither of my grandmothers had english as their first language — my mither ’s mither was from scotstoun and spoke scots , and my faither ’s mither came from the island of harris and spoke gaelic . i am the first generation not to speak the language at all . that is all too common a story in scotland , where prejudice against and punishment of gaelic speakers has seen the language retreat to the heartlands . gaelic broadcasting has been vital in slowing the language ’s decline by introducing it to new generations of young scots , nurturing a more enlightened attitude towards gaelic across scotland and the united kingdom . gaelic programme producers have offered their expertise ; they volunteered to engage with members during the drafting of the bill and amendments to it . in particular , i mention john morrison and donald campbell of mg alba . it is therefore disappointing that the uk government have not drawn sufficiently on that expertise and heeded the calls to reaffirm explicitly their commitment to gaelic in the digital age . mg alba , in its written evidence , said that the bill “ will create a visible disparity in the treatment by parliament of gaelic and welsh broadcasting , ” meaning that “ the gaelic language will continue to be invisible in statute and , as a result , continue to suffer from unclear status and uncertain funding . ” i wish to record the disappointment felt among gaelic broadcasters and the wider gaelic - speaking community . does the hon . member agree that one of the best ways for language lovers to cherish and build up languages , minority languages in particular , is to avoid what sometimes happens , which is the greater politicisation of minority languages ? that becomes divisive , and people react badly . i do agree . i see no reason why languages should be party political . they are a shared cultural asset . when i look online , i am astonished to see people who do not share my constitutional position sometimes attacking scots or gaelic , as if it belongs to us and not them . the language belongs to all of us , as do the other national minority languages . i hope that we will highlight some of the important shortfalls and opportunities when i join my friend i was in hospital , recovering from injury and surgery during some of the bill ’s passage . i extend my gratitude to my hon . friend the member for aberdeen north , who worked so assiduously on the measure in my absence and who consistently does so much good work in the house . as is her wo nt , she spent long hours in committee , tirelessly scrutinising the bill line by line . i note that not a single scottish national party or other opposition amendment was accepted by the uk government — yet another bizarre example of westminster ’s methods . we turn up , work hard , research diligently , engage with stakeholders , contribute to debate and then we are largely ignored . the government are forcing through their curious insistence on channel 4 ’s producing its own content . that is a fig leaf to justify the inordinate waste of time and money on yet another aborted attempt to privatise the channel . as we all know , channel 4 , which is surely best placed to determine its needs , did not want that power . what was it , mr deputy speaker , that a conservative cabinet minister once said about policy making — we have “ had enough of experts ” ? i thank members for their contributions to today ’s debate , and indeed during prelegislative scrutiny and the bill ’s passage thus far . the bill has fantastic support . i have worked on it since 2021 and i am pleased to be back in post , taking over from the interim minister — whom i prefer to call the eminent , knowledgeable knight and former secretary of state — my right hon . friend as we all know , internet access and streaming services have fundamentally changed how audiences access broadcast content , but our public service broadcasters and radio services are governed by laws written 20 or more years ago . the bill is vital to enable our psbs to continue to be world leading in their content and to serve uk audiences , while also driving growth in the creative industries across the uk . i shall briefly address some of the issues that have been raised , but i will first deal with the government amendments . they are minor and technical and seek to ensure that the existing policy positions are properly operational . i have written to members with more detail . i am glad to have the support of my right hon . friend the member for ashford , particularly for the radio amendments . i am grateful to my right hon . friend i understand that new clause 3 would delay the commencement of clause 50 , but that is not the case with amendment 2 , which would simply remove one part of section 40 of the crime and courts act 2013 . we have concerns about my right hon . friend ’s amendments as a package . one issue is about delay , but another is about some of the smaller publishers that do not wish to be part of a regulator . that has been debated at some length this afternoon . i am glad that my right hon . friend the member for maldon is pleased about the government amendment on am . we discussed the matter together . i note his points about local television . he kindly accepts the unlikelihood of our accepting his amendment , but we will continue to consider his representations . as always , i am glad of the support of on public service content being prominently and easily accessible , as is already the case in the linear space , we want psb content to be as prominent as possible , but there is a question in relation to appropriate language . as has been discussed at length , the core aim is to secure prominence for psb services and content online , but for it to be flexible , operable and proportionate , so that we can design the bill for innovation and consumer choice . we are giving ofcom the power to establish that balance . the father of the house , my hon . friend we have seen how technical just the government amendments to close the streamer loophole are . adding digital rights would be a much bigger change , bringing more complexity . it is important that we maintain the right balance between access for audiences and the commercial freedoms that allow rights holders to reinvest in their sport at all levels . we want to get the balance right , and our priority is the impact on the public . it is important that audiences can watch and celebrate major sporting moments , but broadcasting rights provide sports ’ national governing bodies with essential income , enabling them to invest in their sports , whether at elite or grassroots levels . we want to fully evaluate the issue , including how it could be best delivered , before considering legislation that enacts any particular conclusion . i assure members the issue is under careful consideration and we have not yet made a decision . the house will have listened with interest to the minister ’s response to the points made by members from across the chamber , but the government have got to try to sort this out while the bill is before parliament . we want to hear from her that the government are capable of coming to the lords with an amendment or new clause that does not get rid of the interest for the commercial bidders , but says that , when digital and reproduction rights come up for sale , the interests of people in our country , our team and the sports that we regard as important , whether they are new or old , established ones , are taken into account . the house will not be satisfied unless the government come forward with a proposal about what they can either agree with the rights holders or the potential rights bidders . the house of lords will be right to insist on something that addresses that issue , and we want to support them . i appreciate that my hon . friend wants to put down a marker on the issue — i have heard that , and so has the secretary of state . i maintain that the issue of rights is more complex than one might imagine . we want to get the balance right , and we will continue to look at that . moving to the amendments on the issue of age ratings , we are in complete agreement on the need to protect children and vulnerable audiences from harmful and inappropriate video on demand content . i have two children ; i have pushed for children to remain in the remit and for there to be protections for them . for the first time , we are bringing mainstream tv - like , on - demand services in the scope of a new video on demand code , to be drafted and enforced by ofcom . i welcome the general support for the bill given by my hon . friends the members for penistone and stocksbridge ( miriam cates ) and for south west devon ( sir gary streeter ) . ofcom will be getting new powers under the bill to look at broader protection measures and to mandate specific approaches in the code , if deemed necessary , which could be bbfc age ratings . we are trying to move to a more outcomes - based approach rather than a prescriptive approach . we think that there has been great innovation in the space of parental controls , which have often been more effective than a badge rating . however , i have heard what has been said in the house today and we will continue to listen on this subject . the hon . member for aberdeen north also raised the issue of protections for viewers watching on devices such as playstations . i simply wish to reassure her that the definition of “ on - demand programme services ” is not platform - specific ; disney and netflix viewed on a games console would be covered . she also raised questions about the size of producers of content . smaller producers are not keen on some of the proposals that she has made , as they are concerned that they might one day be larger producers and therefore be penalised . we would not want to disincentivise their growth . let me move on to scottish broadcasting in general . we believe that the bill will bring significant benefits to the scottish broadcasting sector and creative economy . i do not underestimate the vital role that our public service broadcasters play in supporting that scottish screen sector . the bill contains provisions to encourage our psbs to broadcast programmes in indigenous , regional and minority languages , such as gaelic , by including them in our new psb remit for television . i know that this is extremely important to numerous scottish members in this house , and i hope the government ’s efforts here are recognised . the partnership between mg alba and the bbc is particularly significant for gaelic language broadcasting . i can assure members that the ongoing provision of gaelic will be a key consideration as the secretary of state and i progress the bbc funding review and the forthcoming bbc charter review . of course , scottish audiences will also continue to benefit from the prominence provisions in the bill . the government are also aware of members ’ concerns about being able to access tv via terrestrial means , and i have spoken to my hon . friend we are always keen to make sure that major sporting events are publicly available as widely as possible , which is why we have the listed events regime , but this is a balancing act . it is another issue where we are trying to find a course through . sports rights holders use income from the sale of rights to the benefit of the wider sporting sector . a lot of sports do not want the listed events regime to be opened up . i know that the scottish national party likes the idea of a government listed events fund , but snp members do not acknowledge the distortive effect it would have on the value of rights , nor do they say who would pay for it . i suspect that the uk taxpayer would and , once again , snp promises would be paid for by everybody else . these snp promises were to protect all governing bodies in the uk , not simply scottish ones . i just want to correct the record on that . will the minister not admit that devolved sporting governing bodies are unfairly disadvantaged , given the size of our tv network , and therefore our free - to - air broadcasters are unable to bid , win and secure the rights ? by contrast , the english football association , for example , has a large tv market , where we have seen itv , then channel 4 and now itv again show the games . i bow to my ministerial colleague the sports minister on the intricacies of sports funding . however , on the listed events regime , it is for the scottish government not only to make a recommendation to us if they want to expand that , but to have the discussions with scottish sporting bodies as to whether that is actually something they want . i will finish by responding to my hon . friend i thank you again , mr deputy speaker , and all members present for their contributions to the debate . i am grateful for the scrutiny the bill has received ; it has benefited greatly from the expertise of everybody in this chamber . i commend the bill to the house . i understand , mr eustice , that you wish to withdraw new clause 3 . i beg to ask leave to withdraw the clause . clause , by leave , withdrawn . “ the secretary of state must , within six months of the passage of this act , review whether a gaelic language service should be given a public service broadcast remit . ”—(thangam debbonaire . ) brought up , and read the first time . question put , that the clause be read a second time . the house divided : ayes 194 , noes 294 . question accordingly negatived . “ ( 1 ) the broadcasting act 1996 is amended as follows . ( 2 ) in section 97 ( as amended by section 299 of the communications act 2003 ) , after subsection ( 1b ) insert — “ ( 1a ) the following events must be included in group a of the list drawn up under subsection ( 1 ) — ( a ) the olympic games ; ( b ) the paralympic games ; ( c ) the fifa world cup finals tournament ; ( d ) the fifa women ’s world cup finals tournament ; ( e ) the european football championship finals tournament ; ( f ) the european women ’s football championship finals tournament ; ( g ) the fa cup final ; ( h ) the scottish fa cup final ; ( i ) the grand national ; ( j ) the wimbledon tennis finals ; ( k ) the rugby union world cup final ; ( l ) six nations rugby tournament matches involving home countries ; ( m ) the derby ; ( n ) the rugby league challenge cup final ; ( o ) any match involving the national teams of scotland , wales , northern ireland or england pertaining to qualification for the events listed in paragraphs ( c ) , ( d ) , ( e ) and ( f).””—(gavin newlands . ) this new clause would make it compulsory for the secretary of state to place the list of sporting events in group a of listed sporting events , ensuring they are available on free to air television in their entirety . the events consist of all current group a events plus the home nations world cup and euro qualifiers . brought up , and read the first time . question put , that the clause be read a second time . the house divided : ayes 193 , noes 295 . question accordingly negatived . amendment made : 19 , page 6 , line 28 , at end insert — “ ( 2a ) in subsection ( 2)(b ) and ( c ) , for “ objectives ” substitute “ requirements” . ”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment secures that section 264a(2 ) of the communications act 2003 refers to “ public service requirements ” . amendments made : 20 , page 23 , line 18 , leave out “ television programme services and internet programme ” and insert “ relevant ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 21 , page 24 , line 4 , leave out “ an internet programme ” and insert “ a relevant ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 22 , page 24 , line 5 , after “ is ” insert “ or forms part of ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 23 , page 24 , line 6 , leave out first “ the service ” and insert “ it ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 24 , page 24 , line 6 , leave out second “ the service ” and insert “ it ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 25 , page 24 , line 8 , leave out “ an internet programme ” and insert “ a relevant ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 26 , page 24 , line 14 , leave out “ no . 26 , internet programme ” and insert “ relevant ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 27 , page 24 , leave out lines 20 to 22 and insert — “ ( a ) television programme service ; ” . this amendment substitutes “ television programme service ” , a term that refers to the types of service in section 98(7)(a ) to ( c ) of the broadcasting act 1996 , inserted by clause 20 , and restricted services . amendment 28 , page 24 , leave out line 23 . this amendment secures that relevant services are defined without reference to the concept of internet programme services . amendment 29 , page 24 , line 24 , leave out from “ service ” to end of line 26 . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 30 , page 24 , line 27 , leave out from “ service ” to end of line 29 . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 31 , page 25 , line 1 , leave out “ an ” and insert “ a television programme service , ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 27 . amendment 32 , page 25 , leave out line 3.—(julia lopez . ) this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendments made : 33 , page 25 , line 14 , leave out from “ force ” to “ for ” in line 16 and insert “ which grants rights to include in a relevant service live coverage of the whole or any part of a group a event ” . this amendment secures that the amendments of section 99 of the broadcasting act 1996 are in terms of “ granting rights ” . amendment 34 , page 25 , line 32 , after “ service ” insert “ which — “ ( i ) if the first relevant service forms part of an internet programme service , is also a service that does not form part of the same internet programme service , and ( ii ) is not a service that is separate from the first relevant service only because section 98(2b ) applies to it ” . this amendment secures that the other relevant service is not a relevant service that forms part of the same internet programme service and is not a separate relevant service only because of section 98(2b ) , inserted by clause 20(2 ) . amendment 35 , page 26 , line 8 , leave out “ after “ service ” insert “ or internet programme ” and insert “ for “ television programme service ” substitute “ relevant”.—(julia lopez . ) this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendments made : 36 , page 26 , line 22 , after “ ( 2 ) , ” insert “ ( 2a ) , ( 2b ) ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 37 . amendment 37 , page 26 , leave out lines 23 to 35 and insert — “ ( 2 ) live coverage of a listed event is authorised by this subsection if — ( a ) identical rights to include live coverage of the event in a relevant service other than the first service ( “ the second service ” ) have been acquired , and ( b ) the second service — ( i ) is provided by a person other than the provider of the first service , ( ii ) falls into a different category from the first service , ( iii ) is not a relevant service other than the first service only because section 98(2b ) applies to it , and ( iv ) is provided for an area that consists of or includes all or almost all of the area for which the first service is provided . ( 2a ) live coverage of a listed event is authorised by this subsection if — ( a ) rights to include live coverage of the event in two or more relevant services other than the first service ( “ the second and further services ” ) have been acquired , ( b ) those rights , taken together , constitute identical rights to include live coverage of the event in the second and further services , ( c ) each of the second and further services — ( i ) is provided by a person other than the provider of the first service , ( ii ) falls into a different category from the first service , ( iii ) is not a relevant service other than the first service only because section 98(2b ) applies to it , and ( iv ) is provided for an area that consists of or includes all or almost all of the area for which the first service is provided . ( 2b ) live coverage of a listed event is authorised by this subsection if — ( a ) the event is a sporting event that involves different sports , ( b ) rights to include live coverage of the event in two or more relevant services other than the first service ( “ the second and further services ” ) have been acquired , ( c ) that additional coverage , taken as a whole , is adequate live coverage of the event , ( d ) each of the second and further services is a television programme service , and ( e ) each of the second and further services — ( i ) is provided by a person other than the provider of the first service , ( ii ) falls into a different category from the first service , ( iii ) is not a relevant service other than the first service only because section 98(2b ) applies to it , and ( iv ) is provided for an area that consists of or includes all or almost all of the area for which the first service is provided . ”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment alters substituted section 101 of the broadcasting act 1996 to include cases where the showing of an event is authorised by coverage in two or more relevant services and to make more specific provision about the coverage of multisport events . amendments made : 38 , page 27 , line 33 , leave out “ 101(2)(a)(ii ) ” and insert “ 101(2b)(c ) ” . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 37 . amendment 39 , page 27 , line 37 , at end insert — “ ( 4 ) after subsection ( 2 ) insert — “ ( 2a ) regulations made by virtue of subsection ( 1)(aa ) may , in particular — ( a ) describe what represents the provision of adequate live coverage by reference to — ( i ) the duration of the live coverage ( whether expressed as a percentage of the duration of the proceedings or otherwise ) , ( ii ) the number of television programme services in which the live coverage is included , or ( iii ) a combination of those matters ; ( b ) provide for live coverage not to be taken into account if the provider of the service is unable to select what parts of the proceedings are covered . ( 2b ) when making regulations by virtue of subsection ( 1)(aa ) , ofcom must have regard to — ( a ) the forms of live coverage that ofcom consider are likely to satisfy the interest of members of the public in the united kingdom or an area of the united kingdom in listed events of the sort to which section 101(2b)(c ) relates ; ( b ) the desirability of facilitating the making of arrangements under which rights to include live coverage of sporting events that involve different sports are acquired by providers of relevant services in both of the categories of relevant service set out in section 98(1).””—(julia lopez . ) this amendment makes provision about the regulations that ofcom may make under the power conferred by section 104za(1)(aa ) of the broadcasting act 1996 ( inserted by clause 23 ) . amendment made : 40 , page 30 , line 29 , at end insert — “ ( 4 ) ofcom must draw up a code under section 104 of the broadcasting act 1996 as soon as practicable after paragraph 18 of schedule 2 to this act ( amendments of section 104 ) comes into force . ( 5 ) the code drawn up by ofcom in accordance with subsection ( 4 ) is not to have effect in relation to any time before section 22 of this act comes into force . ( 6 ) regulations under section 55(5 ) ( transitional , transitory or saving provision in connection with commencement ) may provide for the old section 104 code to continue to have effect in relation to cases specified in the regulations after the coming into force of the code drawn up by ofcom in accordance with subsection ( 4 ) . ( 7 ) in this section — “ ofcom ” means the office of communications ; “ the old section 104 code ” means the code drawn up under section 104 of the broadcasting act 1996 which is continued in effect by paragraph 51(2 ) of schedule 18 to the communications act 2003.”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment requires ofcom to draw up a code under section 104 of the broadcasting act 1996 , as amended by this bill . it also provides for the old code to have effect until that new code comes into force and in relation to transitional cases . amendment proposed : 88 , in clause 25 , page 30 , line 30 , at end insert — “ ( 4 ) on the date on which section 21 comes into force , the secretary of state must revise the list maintained for the purposes of part 4 of the broadcasting act 1996 so that it includes — ( a ) at least one cricket test match each year between the months of may and september ; ( b ) at least one cricket one day international match each year between the months of may and september ; ( c ) all other currently listed group a events . ( 5 ) the events listed under subsection ( 4 ) must be allocated to group a.”—(jamie stone . ) question put , that the amendment be made . the committee divided : ayes 20 , noes 288 . question accordingly negatived . amendments made : 41 , page 46 , line 13 , at end insert — “ ( ga ) the purpose of preparing or reviewing a code of practice under section 362ap ( code of practice relating to duties under section 362ao ) ; ” this amendment adds to the list of particular purposes for which information may be required by ofcom . amendment 42 , page 47 , line 8 , at end insert — “ ( 11a ) in this section , a reference to the functions of ofcom under this part includes a reference to their functions under schedules 16a and 16b , so far as relating to this part . ” this amendment makes provision about the reference to ofcom ’s functions under part 3a in section 362as of the communications act 2003 . amendment 43 , page 60 , line 8 , at end insert — “ ( 9a ) in this section , a reference to the functions of ofcom under this part includes a reference to their functions under schedules 16a and 16b , so far as relating to this part . ” this amendment makes provision about references to ofcom ’s functions under part 3a in section 362az6 of the communications act 2003 . amendment 44 , page 62 , line 37 , at end insert “ and schedule 16b ( so far as relating to this part ) ” . this amendment expands the reference to part 3a in section 362az9(c ) of the communications act 2003 . amendment 45 , page 62 , line 40 , after “ part ” insert “ or schedule 16b ( so far as relating to this part ) ” . this amendment applies section 362az10 to notices given by ofcom under schedule 16b , so far as relating to part 3a. amendment 46 , page 64 , line 32 , leave out from “ service ” ” to end of line 34 and insert “ has the meaning given by section 362aa;”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment corrects an error in section 362az12(1 ) . amendments made : 47 , page 67 , line 33 , after “ service ” insert “ that is or forms part of a designated internet programme service ” . this amendment limits the reference to on - demand programme services provided by c4c to those that are or form part of a designated internet programme service . amendment 48 , page 67 , line 34 , after “ service ” insert “ that is or forms part of a designated internet programme service ” . this amendment limits the reference to non - uk on - demand programme services provided by c4c to those that are or form part of a designated internet programme service . amendment 49 , page 68 , line 3 , at end insert — “ ( 4 ) in this section , “ designated internet programme service ” has the same meaning as in part 3a ( see section 362az12).””—(julia lopez . ) this amendment is consequential on amendments 47 and 48 . amendments made : 50 , page 70 , line 7 , leave out “ power ” and insert “ powers ” . this amendment is consequential on amendment 51 . amendment 51 , page 70 , line 19 , at end insert — “ ( 3a ) s4c may do anything it considers appropriate in association with anything it does in exercise of the power in subsection ( 1 ) . ” this amendment confers on s4c the power to do things other than providing audiovisual content where it considers it appropriate to do so in association with the provision of audiovisual content.—(julia lopez . ) amendment made : 52 , page 81 , line 29 , at end insert — “ ( 7a ) in section 103a ( renewal of national licences ) , in subsection ( 9 ) — ( a ) after paragraph ( b ) insert “ and ” ; ( b ) omit paragraph ( d ) and the “ and ” before it . ( 7b ) in section 111 ( power to revoke licences ) — ( a ) omit subsection ( 4 ) ( procedure where national service ceases to be provided ) ; ( b ) in subsection ( 6 ) , omit “ , ( 4)” . ”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment removes the procedure for revocation that may be used in certain cases involving licences for national analogue radio services . amendments made : 53 , page 90 , line 25 , at end insert — “ ( 5a ) subsection ( 4 ) applies in relation to the making of regulations under subsection ( 5 ) as it applies in relation to the making of regulations under subsection ( 1 ) . ” this amendment provides for consultation before the making of regulations under section 362bb(5 ) of the communications act 2003 . amendment 54 , page 101 , line 29 , at end insert — “ ( 11a ) in this section , a reference to the functions of ofcom under this part includes a reference to their functions under schedules 16a and 16b , so far as relating to this part . ” this amendment makes provision about the reference to ofcom ’s functions under part 3b in section 362bq of the communications act 2003 . amendment 55 , page 103 , line 19 , leave out “ confirmation ” and insert “ contravention ” . this amendment corrects a drafting error . amendment 56 , page 108 , line 11 , at end insert — “ ( 9a ) in this section , a reference to the functions of ofcom under this part includes a reference to their functions under schedules 16a and 16b , so far as relating to this part . ” this amendment makes provision about references to ofcom ’s functions under part 3b in section 362bx of the communications act 2003 . amendment 57 , page 110 , line 40 , at end insert “ and schedule 16b ( so far as relating to this part ) ” . this amendment expands the reference to part 3b in section 362bz1(b ) of the communications act 2003 . amendment 58 , page 111 , line 3 , after “ part ” insert “ or schedule 16b ( so far as relating to this part ) ” . this amendment applies section 362bz2 of the communications act 2003 to notices given by ofcom under schedule 16b , so far as relating to part 3b. amendment 59 , page 112 , line 39 , at end insert — “ “ internet radio service ” has the meaning given by section 362bf;”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment is an addition to the defined terms listed in section 362bz4(1 ) of the communications act 2003 . amendment proposed : 2 , page 114 , line 7 , leave out subsections ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) and insert — “ ( 2 ) section 40(3 ) of the crime and courts act 2013 is omitted . ”—(george eustice . ) this amendment would allow the secretary of state the option in future of commencing subsection 2 of section 40 of the crime and courts acts 2013 . the house divided : ayes 195 , noes 284 . question accordingly negatived . amendments made : 60 , page 120 , line 8 , leave out — “ an on - demand programme service ” and insert “ a qualifying audiovisual service other than one to which paragraph ( a ) relates ” . this amendment alters paragraph 10(1)(b ) of schedule 12 to the communications act 2003 , inserted by paragraph 4(b ) of schedule 1 , to refer to qualifying audiovisual services . amendment 61 , page 120 , line 9 , leave out “ the duty under paragraph 7(1 ) ” and insert — “ a duty imposed by virtue of paragraph 7(1 ) or ( 4 ) ” . this amendment adds a reference to the duty of s4c imposed by virtue of paragraph 7(4 ) of schedule 12 to the communications act 2003 . amendment 62 , page 120 , line 15 , at end insert — “ ( d ) after sub - paragraph ( 11 ) insert — “ ( 12 ) see also sections 278b and 278c ( which make further provision for the interpretation of this paragraph etc).””—(julia lopez . ) this amendment is consequential on amendment 60 . amendments made : 63 , page 121 , line 13 , leave out “ in section 97 ( listed events ) ” and insert — “ ( 1 ) section 97 ( listed events ) is amended as follows . ( 2 ) in subsection ( 2)(d ) , for “ televise ” substitute “ show ” . ” this amendment and amendments 64 and 65 add amendments of the broadcasting act 1996 similar to those in paragraphs 14(2 ) and 15 of schedule 2 . amendment 64 , page 122 , line 15 , at end insert — “ ( 5a ) in subsection ( 4)(a ) , for “ televise ” substitute “ show ” . ” see explanatory statement for amendment 63 . amendment 65 , page 122 , line 26 , after “ ( 4 ) ” insert — “ ( a ) in paragraph ( c ) , for “ televise ” substitute “ show ” ; ” . see explanatory statement for amendment 63 . amendment 66 , page 123 , leave out lines 18 and 19 . this amendment removes an unnecessary change to section 105 of the broadcasting act 1996 . amendment 67 , page 123 , line 26 , at end insert — “ , or ( b ) is available for use by members of the public ( within the meaning of section 368r(4 ) of the communications act 2003 ) . ” this amendment relates to the meaning of a reference in part 4 of the broadcasting act 1996 to an on - demand programme service or a non - uk on - demand programme service being available to members of the public . amendment 68 , page 123 , line 28 , leave out from second “ a ” to end of line 29 . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 27 . amendment 69 , page 123 , line 31 , at end insert — “ ( aa ) a reference to the provision of an on - demand programme service or a non - uk on - demand programme service is to be read in accordance with section 368r(5 ) and ( 6 ) of the communications act 2003 . ” this amendment adds provision about the meaning of references in part 4 of the broadcasting act 1996 to providing an on - demand programme service or a non - uk on - demand programme service . amendment 70 , page 123 , leave out lines 32 to 34 . this amendment is consequential upon amendment 28 . amendment 71 , page 123 , line 39 , after “ part ” insert — “ as it relates to relevant services of the kind described in section 98(7)(g)”.—(julia lopez . ) this amendment secures consistency within section 105(1d ) of the broadcasting act 1996 , inserted by schedule 2 . amendments made : 72 , page 133 , line 3 , at end insert — “ 23a in section 107 ( code relating to avoidance of unjust or unfair treatment or interference with privacy ) , in subsection ( 5)(b ) , for “ the welsh authority ” , in both places it occurs , substitute “ s4c ” . ” this amendment adds a consequential amendment relating to s4c. amendment 73 , page 137 , line 15 , at end insert — “ ( 2a ) in sub - paragraph ( 2 ) , after “ of a ” insert “ television” . ”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment secures that the relevant purpose set out in paragraph 10(2 ) of schedule 12 to the communications act 2003 relates to television programme services . amendment made : 74 , schedule 5 , page 142 , line 31 , after “ to ” insert — “ an on - demand programme service that is ” . this amendment clarifies the reference to on - demand programme services that are tier 1 services by virtue of section 368ha(1)(a ) of the communications act 2003 . amendment made : 75 , page 146 , leave out lines 9 to 14.—(julia lopez . ) this amendment removes repeated text . amendment made : 76 , page 159 , line 41 , at end insert — “ ( 4 ) in schedule 9 to that act ( certain internet services not subject to duties relating to regulated provider pornographic content ) — ( a ) in the italic heading before paragraph 5 , after “ services ” insert “ and non - uk on - demand programme services that are tier 1 services ” ; ( b ) in paragraph 5 ( on - demand programme services ( entire internet service ) ) — ( i ) in sub - paragraph ( 1 ) , after “ programme service ” insert “ or a non - uk on - demand programme service that is a tier 1 service ” ; ( ii ) in sub - paragraph ( 2 ) , for “ has ” substitute “ , “ non - uk on - demand programme service ” and “ tier 1 service ” have ” ; ( iii ) in sub - paragraph ( 2 ) , for “ section 368a ” substitute “ sections 368a , 368aa and 368ha ” ; ( c ) in the italic heading before paragraph 6 , after “ services ” insert “ and non - uk on - demand programme services that are tier 1 services ” ; ( d ) in paragraph 6 ( on - demand programme services ( part of internet service ) ) — ( i ) in sub - paragraph ( 2)(a ) , after “ programme service ” insert “ or a non - uk on - demand programme service that is a tier 1 service ” ; ( ii ) in sub - paragraph ( 3 ) , after “ programme service ” insert “ or a non - uk on - demand programme service that is a tier 1 service” . ”—(julia lopez . ) this amendment adds to the descriptions of internet services that are listed in schedule 9 to the online safety act 2023 and are therefore internet services that are “ exempt ” for the purposes of part 5 of that act . amendment made : 77 , page 168 , line 6 , after “ 362az(6)(a ) ” insert — “ or ( as the case may be ) 362br(6)(a)”.—(julia lopez . ) this amendment adds a reference to the corresponding provision in part 3b of the communications act 2003 ( inserted by clause 48 ) . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . i am glad that , as we finish the bill ’s passage through this house , it is with the same enthusiasm and cross - party support as when we began . my hon . friend i would like to pay tribute to my right hon . friend i would like to extend my particular thanks to the culture , media and sport committee , under the chairmanship of my hon . friend i should also like to thank my hon . friends the members for folkestone and hythe ( damian collins ) , for aylesbury , for east devon ( simon jupp ) and for warrington south ( andy carter ) for their thoughtful and considered engagement . on the opposition benches , i extend my particular thanks to the hon . members for barnsley east ( stephanie peacock ) and for aberdeen north ( kirsty blackman ) for the constructive way in which they approached the committee scrutiny of the bill . before the bill moves to the other place , i should also like to say thank you to the significant number of dcms policy officials and lawyers for their work in preparing such a substantial bill alongside my parliamentary counsel . finally , as is customary — and also because i mean it — i want to say thank you to the bill team from dcms : victoria maccallum , charlotte brennan , lisa bourke , mollie mchale , and elie pelling . i would also like to thank myrtle macpherson and liam hunt from private offices , who have supported us throughout this process . we have a truly talented media team in dcms , and i am grateful to them for all the work they have done and for the patience they have shown throughout the years we have been working on this together . we have discussed the significance of the bill at length . when it receives royal assent , we will launch a wide - ranging programme of secondary legislation to fully implement its measures . we will see further considered collaboration between the government , industry and ofcom as these new reforms are implemented . i look forward to seeing this important legislation come into force , and to supporting industry and ofcom as we move into a new era for broadcasting . i commend the bill to the house . i join the minister in celebrating the collaborative and consensual approach to the bill , although i am disappointed that the government chose not to support the excellent amendments that we either tabled or supported . i am sorry that there has been no movement yet on slapps , to which i hope we will return . i thank everyone who has contributed today , including my right hon . friend i also thank the select committee members who did such a great job of coming up with good ideas , and who were so thoughtful and considered in their work . i thank the bill ’s stakeholders are many and varied . some broadcasters are thrilled to bits and others still have questions , but they have all been willing to take time to talk to us . we have looked at a wide range of measures that we know are necessary for broadcasters , but section 40 has been difficult for many people . i respect the fact that people have approached this with serious intent , purpose and commitment . we probably will not vote on third reading , because we all agree that the bill is necessary . as the bill goes to the other place , section 40 will be removed and we will not stand in its way , as my hon . friend the member for barnsley east outlined in committee and as i reiterate now . however , we have missed an opportunity this evening for a more nuanced version of that repeal , and we are disappointed that amendment 2 did not pass . there is a further discussion to be had about how we can protect the provision of trusted public interest journalism in the modern age . if we are in government after the next general election , labour commits to working with the press recognition panel , ipso , impress and anyone else we need to work with to ensure the highest standards of ethical journalism . whether it is online disinformation undermining our democratic institutions , the decline of local press outlets or the rise of slapps , all these issues have to be taken seriously . for now , our aim must be to ensure the passage of this bill so that these important measures reach the statute book . the film and tv industries remain crucial to our economy , contributing more than £ 18 billion in 2020 alone and supporting 280,000 jobs across the country . it is right that we update the law after 20 years , so , as well as thanking colleagues , i thank the clerks in the public bill office , who have worked incredibly hard to ensure the bill receives proper scrutiny by assisting us in drafting amendments . i thank the public service broadcasters , uk radio stations , tv and radio platforms , podcasters , viewer representative groups and all the other stakeholders . and i particularly thank the hacked off campaigners , who have been willing to speak so generously and openly about their often painful experiences . it is a pleasure to speak on third reading . as the minister said , it was quite fun and enjoyable to serve on the public bill committee — although the whips office should not see that as a hint that i want to be on every future public bill committee . the media bill is an important piece of legislation , and a key theme throughout its passage has been the importance of prominence for our public service broadcasters — the bbc , itv , channel 4 and channel 5 . i should declare that i have worked for three of them , and i am sure that channel 4 will one day complete the set . that is not a hint that i will be looking for a new job in a year ’s time , perhaps much to the opposition ’s chagrin . i am extremely pleased with the new regime to ensure appropriate prominence for public service broadcasters , but i wanted to say a word about it . i was pleased to hear the minister say that there will be detailed consultation on the work with ofcom , but it is important that parliament sets out clearly to the regulator what we mean by prominence . i look forward to the government taking a robust stance to ensure that ofcom feels entitled and empowered to adopt a muscular approach . it must be bold with the tv manufacturers in expressing the will of this place to ensure that the psbs really are featured prominently . we need look at only one recent example of television to prove the value of psbs : the drama that has made the headlines in recent weeks , the itv programme “ mr bates vs. the post office ” . it highlighted an injustice to millions of people who had not previously been aware of the horizon scandal , despite the fact that it had been covered in many news media and that the government were already working extremely hard to provide redress and recompense for postmasters well before the drama was aired . “ mr bates ” has had an immediate and important effect , but the programme could only have been made by a psb . the nature of that story is such that , yes , it is of massive interest to the uk audience , but its international appeal as a television programme might be less evident . itv recognised the significance of the scandal , put serious money into it and took a commercial risk that would likely not have been approved by a non - psb . that speaks to the value of the legislation before us . the hon . gentleman is right to highlight this issue , but it is also right to highlight the role of the under - secretary of state for business and trade , i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for making that point . as i said , the government had been acting well in advance of the drama , but the programme made the public aware in a way that the news had not been able to . the government made serious efforts — he is right to draw attention to the incredible work of the current minister with responsibility for postal services — to achieve recompense and redress , but the tv drama made the public aware of the scandal and the need for redress . channel 5 has pointed out that public service content relies on “ easy access ” for viewers . without the reforms in the bill , the significant risk is that proper public - value content will be harder to find for audiences . that can not be tenable . i am delighted that the bill seeks to overcome that . it is imperative that ofcom ensures and assures prominence for our psbs , as the house expects . i do not want to detain the house any longer , but i will just say that public service broadcasting is one of the things that makes this country special . there is a britishness about our broadcasting system and market that is unique . the bill recognises and protects that , and i am delighted to support it . i want to say a few thank yous , but i will first talk about the bill briefly . we need a media bill . i am glad that the government are doing their best to strike a balance between rights and responsibilities with the psbs , as i said earlier . it is important that the bill updates the existing situation and improves things for internet access services . it includes many welcome steps forward . i still have the concern i expressed earlier about the definition of on - demand services . i appreciate what the minister said — for example , that disney+ is covered by it — but if we look at tv viewing apps on a playstation , the order of the apps or of the programmes is not covered by the definition . because a playstation is mostly for playing games , its on - demand tv section is not covered . i think more can be done to future - proof the definition and update it to ensure that it covers everything that the government want it to cover . it should cover the ways in which people generally watch television , especially those methods that increase as time goes on . i do not want to be overly critical , but i wanted to flag that point again . coming to the thank yous , i thank my hon . friend we did not take oral evidence , which is fairly unusual for a bill committee that starts off in the house of commons . i understand the minister ’s reasons for that decision , which involved the pre - legislative consultation that took place . however , several organisations were disappointed not to have the opportunity to give oral evidence directly to the committee . i thank all those organisations that came forward . the shadow secretary of state mentioned quite a few . many organisations have worked incredibly hard to ensure that members of parliament know their views . i particularly thank broadcast 2040 + , the media reform coalition , bbc alba , stv , channel 4 , bbc , amazon and hacked off , members of which i met on several occasions , particularly about the amendments that we discussed today . i hope that we get close to what was promised to those who gave evidence to the leveson inquiry and to a resolution that means greater fairness for everybody . unfortunately , it feels as though the bill is not the place where that will happen . it is clear from views across the house that change needs to happen to ensure that people get the redress and justice that they hope for . i thank all those who have put time and effort into trying to improve the bill . i thank all the staff who have worked on the bill , whether those on the government ’s bill team or the clerks who have done their best with the messy amendments that i sent them and asked them to make into something that looks vaguely sensible . those staff are never mentioned enough . i thank all those who have had an input into the bill . i congratulate the minister and the department on getting the bill this far . if i may be presumptuous , in the unavoidable absence of the chair of the culture , media and sport committee , i thank the minister for her kind remarks about the select committee ’s contribution to the scrutiny of the bill . this is probably the appropriate time to note the bill ’s historic nature . it is 20 years since the house passed an equivalent bill . twenty years ago , facebook , tiktok , snapchat and twitter or x — whatever we call it these days — did not exist . the entire landscape has changed completely . regulating with tools that are 20 years out of date is impossible . that is why it is important that the bill is future proofed . the thought occurs to me that if it takes 20 more years before the house comes back to the subject , by then we will doubtless get sound and vision beamed straight into our ears and eyeballs after pressing the chip that will have been implanted in us . regulating that will be even more difficult . i was pondering which minister will be here in 20 years to cope with that , and it will almost certainly be my right hon . friend i echo the remarks of my hon . friend may i simply say that if question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft financial services and markets act 2000 ( regulated activities ) ( amendment ) order 2024 , which was laid before this house on question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the civil procedure ( amendment no . 4 ) rules 2023 ( si , 2023 , no . 1397 ) , dated question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that this house , at its rising on question agreed to . i rise to present a petition about the need for the government to fund the household support fund from april 2024 . the fund has supported over 10 million people since october 2022 to afford food and utilities during the cost of living crisis , preventing millions from being plunged deeper into poverty . yet the government are axing this funding in march 2024 , with no regard for the most vulnerable families across the country . the petition states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to provide adequate support for low - income households for essentials through the household support fund , and ensuring this provision is extended beyond march 2024 . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of manchester gorton , declares that the household support fund has played a vital role in supporting low income households to pay for essentials like energy bills and food following the pandemic and during the cost of living crisis ; notes that since october 2021 , the government has provided over £ 2 billion to local authorities in england ; further declares that over 10 million awards were made using this funding between the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to provide adequate support for low - income households for essentials through the household support fund , and ensuring this provision is extended beyond march 2024 . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p002900 ] i rise to present a petition on behalf of the constituents of linlithgow and east falkirk , relating to food insecurity . at this time of a cost of living crisis , it is shocking that one in four households in the uk with children have experienced food insecurity , with 28 % of young mums skipping meals — a figure that rises to 37 % for those on universal credit . with your indulgence , mr deputy speaker , i say to those petitioners affected by the issue and other aspects of the cost of living crisis that i am hosting a cost of living drop - in event on friday at the reconnect regal theatre and i encourage them to come along . the petition states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to review the rate of universal credit to ensure it covers the essentials and that no parent or child goes hungry , and also that the government introduces measures to stop oil and gas companies profiting at record levels whilst families are unable to afford necessities . and the petitioners remain , etc . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of linlithgow and east falkirk , declares that in a time of crisis in the cost of living , one in four uk households with children have experienced food insecurity , affecting an estimated four million children ; further that in their struggle to feed their children , 28 % of young mums are skipping meals each day , with this figure increasing to 37 % among young mums on universal credit ; and notes that while the spiralling cost of energy is affecting he cost of food production , storage and transport and families find themselves choosing between heating and eating , oil and gas companies post record profits , paying out billions to shareholders and continuing to be aided by uk government subsidies and tax reliefs . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to review the rate of universal credit to ensure it covers the essentials and that no parent or child goes hungry , and also that the government introduces measures to stop oil and gas companies profiting at record levels whilst families are unable to afford necessities . and the petitioners remain etc . ] [ p002906 ] this petition , on behalf of the residents of glasgow north , was drafted before the ruling of the international court of justice and the decision of the uk government to cut funding to that united nations relief and works agency , but that makes the petition calling for an end to the collective punishment of the palestinian people , the urgent release of all hostages and an end to the siege of gaza to allow vital supplies of food , fuel , medicine and water to reach civilian populations all the more urgent . the petition also recognises the resolution of the house on “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to join with others in the international community in urgently pressing all parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire , and to call on the uk government to recognise the state of palestine alongside the state of israel . and the petitioners remain , etc . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of glasgow north , declares that the attacks by hamas on israel on 7th october 2023 were acts of terror , and unequivocally condemns the taking of hostages and the loss of innocent lives in those attacks ; further that the petitioners condemn the disproportionate response of the israel defence forces , and affirms that there must be an end to the collective punishment of the palestinian people ; further declares for the urgent release of all hostages and an end to the siege of gaza to allow vital supplies of food , fuel , medicine and water to reach the civilian population ; further declares support for the calls by the united nations and many other international actors for an immediate ceasefire on all sides of the conflict and supports the global consensus in support of a two - state solution with a sovereign , prosperous palestinian state , living side by side with a safe and secure israel ; and notes the resolution of the house of commons on 13th october 2014 calling on the uk government to recognise the state of palestine alongside the state of israel . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to join with others in the international community in urgently pressing all parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire , and to call on the uk government to recognise the state of palestine alongside the state of israel . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p002908 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(robert largan . ) to avert climate breakdown , the vast majority of the fossil fuel industry ’s coal , gas and oil reserves need to stay firmly in the ground . yet successive governments , led by different political parties , have failed to take the kind of action that the science demands . they have known the indisputable facts and the consequences of inaction . such consequences include the fact that the costs of delaying , and of failing to address climate , economic and social chaos , far outweigh those associated with an orderly transition along the lines of a jobs - rich , inequality - busting green new deal . yet government after government have continued with business as usual . government after government have refused to grasp that despite some breakthroughs , successes and progress , the big picture has continued to get worse . i do not deny that we are now seeing record amounts of energy being generated from renewable resources , for example , but these very welcome achievements do nothing to eliminate the dangerous damage arising from the continued extraction and burning of fossil fuels . given what the experts have been saying for decades now , we have to ask ourselves why this government , and others before them , have presided over , and colluded in , the frankly criminal decisions that have seen yet more oil , gas and coal continue to be explored and exploited . the answer to that question can be traced back to one consistent factor : the role of the fossil fuel industry in our politics . for over those very same decades when climate scientists have been warning of the rapidly shrinking window to avert a climate emergency , fossil fuel companies and their lobbyists have been denying the science , and then they have delayed , weakened and sabotaged climate action . those tactics have enabled them to make billions in profits , while heating the planet and destroying communities . in this debate , i want to highlight some of the ways in which fossil fuel influence is exerted in our politics and to propose how it should urgently be curtailed . i want to start with a case study , featuring the little - known fossil fuel lobby group offshore energies uk — oeuk — whose members include north sea operators such as equinor , harbour energy , bp and shell , and whose activities have resulted in a windfall tax that actually rewards companies for digging up more oil and gas , and a “ price floor ” introduced entirely at the industry ’s behest . let me explain how that has happened . according to analysis of data in the public domain , oeuk and its members met uk government ministers more than 210 times in the year following russia ’s invasion of ukraine — that is nearly once every working day . in june 2022 , in that one month , when the energy ( oil and gas ) profits levy bill was drafted and consulted on , the industry went into lobbying overdrive : oeuk and its operator members had twice as many meetings with ministers as they did in the month before or after . it also held a parliamentary reception , in the name of the all - party group on the british offshore oil and gas industry , for which it provides , conveniently , the secretariat . the main message for the mps and peers in attendance was that the windfall tax would “ undermine and disrupt ” investment in the sector . in a meeting a few days later with the then chancellor , now prime minister , the industry spelt out what it wanted to see in the bill . its recommendations , also put in writing to the treasury , included protection for petroleum revenue tax repayments , which are , in essence , an existing tax break that can pay fossil fuel firms back for taxes they have paid in the past . the subsequent legislation did exactly as oeuk requested . moreover , it introduced an enormous 80 % “ investment allowance ” , which , combined with existing tax breaks , means that fossil fuel companies can claim £ 91 back for every £ 100 they invest in uk oil and gas extraction . as a result of that climate - wrecking loophole , shell , for example , went on to pay no windfall tax at all in 2022 . the lobbying around the bill was happening in the context of a wider lobbying campaign by oeuk , which had been urging the treasury all year to reinstate regular meetings of the so - called “ fiscal forum ” , an advisory group that basically invites oeuk and its members to shape their own tax regime . on in spring 2023 , oeuk board members of harbour energy and equinor met with treasury officials . the minutes , secured via a freedom of information request , state that the “ equinor reps smiled ” at government ’s reassurances — yes , i am sure they did . the hon . lady is eloquently setting out how the government are responding to heavy lobbying from the fossil fuel industry . does she agree that no future generation — neither our children nor our grandchildren — will ever thank us , the politicians of today , for having put all our energy and focus into the energies of the past ? does she agree that the fossil fuel industry should really look at itself as well ? it will come as no surprise to the hon . member that i completely agree with her . i do wonder what our own kids will think when the planet continues to heat still further , and what their kids , in turn , will think . what were we thinking of ? what was the fossil fuel industry thinking of , certainly , beyond its profits ? apparently very little . i commend the hon . lady for bringing forward this debate . she has been assiduous in her commitment to these issues . indeed , i would go as far as to say the hon . lady has , on many occasions , been the conscience of this house on these issues . does she agree that it is essential that votes cast and actions taken in this place are influenced by facts and reasoned opinion , and never by one individual or group ? while there is a place for lobbying — let us be honest : it is through lobbying that we learn more ; i understand that — it should be only a part of the consideration of any issue . i thank the hon . member for both his comments , with which i agree , and his kind remarks . he is right : of course , lobbying happens , but a line gets crossed when money starts to change hands . there are perceptions — never mind what the reality is — of members and groups potentially pursuing interests that are to their own advantage , rather than for the public good . in june 2023 , after sustained further lobbying meetings , letters and statements in the press , the government introduced the price floor that oeuk had so assiduously lobbied for — surprise , surprise . to summarise : privileged access and meetings with ministers , an opaque , official - looking lobbying group and an oil and gas fiscal forum advising the treasury collectively resulted in significant changes to government plans , which , in turn , resulted in a windfall tax that raised just half of what the government had promised and saved corporations billions . all , of course , at a time of record fossil fuel company profits and a cost of living crisis for consumers . that is what happens when we let fossil fuels into every corner of our politics . that is only the tip of the iceberg . last year , it was reported that gulf states pushing fossil fuels at cop28 had hired the now lord hammond and lord maude , along with former prime minister tony blair and other former leading politicians as “ consultants ” . as we know , it is incredibly easy for senior british politicians and civil servants to swap government offices for consultancy retainers ; they simply have to register with the advisory committee on business appointments — a body which even its chair , the former conservative mp and now lord pickles , admits is toothless — if they take up any new paid or unpaid work within two years of leaving office . for example , acoba ’s response to lord hammond working for mohammed bin salman ’s regime was to note that his inside knowledge of the uk government could be “ perceived to offer an unfair advantage ” , and then it went ahead and approved it all the same . when , in 2021 , lord hammond ’s advisory work was deemed by acoba to have breached the rules , the only sanction was a strongly worded letter . i know and accept the convention not to criticise the conduct of individual mps or peers , so i simply want to set out facts that are already in the public domain and on the public record . it is not just former ministers going through the revolving door between parliamentarians and the fossil fuel industry to take up lucrative consultancy roles . second jobs , placements , internships and sabbaticals are all different sides of the same coin , and all too often a lot of coins are made or exchanged . members of this house can benefit financially from the fossil fuel sector in other ways , too , as three of the biggest donors to the conservative party are funders or board members of the climate science sceptic think - tank the global warming policy foundation , or its spin - off net zero watch . companies from cardiff airport to exxonmobil are handing out football tickets and passes for hospitality events to mps across the political spectrum . in fact , i think i can safely say that there is probably only one uk - wide political party represented in parliament that has not had some kind of handout from the fossil fuel industry , whether donations , expenses - paid trips , salaries or gifts . at this point , i give credit to financial benefit can not be divorced from conflict of interest or perceived conflict , it is worth noting that there is no requirement on members of this house to declare any income from dividends or any income gained from the sale of shares . given the seemingly routine way in which shares get moved into blind trusts when mps become ministers , as used by the current prime minister and chancellor , or the £ 70,000 threshold at which we are supposed to publicly declare a shareholding stake , the idea that we have transparency around conflicts of interests is laughable . the evidence suggests that members of the other place are just as at risk of the perception , at least , that they are influenced by dirty fossil fuel money . a total of 43 peers have a significant stake in the industry according to 2021 data . there , the declaration threshold is lower at £ 50,000 . it is lower again at the senedd and holyrood , but they are certainly not immune to fossil fuel influence . a lower threshold would clearly be an improvement , but we need to do more than just tinker with the existing rules . in the vast majority of these instances , nobody is doing anything that breaks the parliamentary rules . the transparency of lobbying , non - party campaigning and trade union administration act 2014 only restricts about 5 % of lobbyists — mostly trade unions representing workers , and charities . meanwhile , corporations can pretty much do what they like , and consistently they do . when we realise , as analysis by the guardian clearly shows , that there is a direct link between fossil fuel money and the positions that mps take in parliament , it is self - evident that the rules can not be fit for purpose . i believe that being an mp is about serving the public interest , not the interests of fossil fuel companies . in case anyone wants to suggest that they are working in the public interest , let me remind the house of the economic impact of continuing to extract and burn fossil fuels : public debt could rise to 289 % of gdp by the end of the century if climate change is left unchecked , according to the office for budget responsibility . the climate impact is well known : if we want to be in with even a 50 % chance of staying within the all - important 1.5 ° limit , we can not open new fields , and we should be phasing out existing fossil fuel infrastructure in ways that will secure a just transition . that is not what these companies are using their influence to make happen , and they are frighteningly effective . climate action tracker cites the government ’s doubling down on north sea oil and gas extraction as a key factor in the uk ’s insufficient rating on compatibility with the paris agreement and 1.5 ° . these companies ’ dirty fingerprints can be seen all over our politics , and it is time to clean things up . what does that look like ? first , there would be a firewall between the industry and decision making — no lobbying meetings . if meetings are happening — for example , about the best way to secure the green transition — there must be full transparency , delivered in something approaching real time , not months after the event . at present , the government publish details of some meetings every three months or so — often , it is every six months — but they are incomplete at best . i had to ask a series of formal parliamentary questions to expose a lunch that the then secretary of state for business , energy and industrial strategy , it goes without saying that the behind - closed - doors cosy dinners , drinks events and so forth have to be dragged into the sunlight . there is no convenient line between social events and political business for ministers or ministers - in - waiting . if they have conversations about policy , either off or on the record , with someone from the oil and gas sector , or indeed another sector that stands to benefit , they should be required to make that public pretty much immediately . a proper firewall means no industry representation on panels , government research bodies , or expert or advisory bodies ; no fossil fuel involvement in climate negotiations ; no place on government delegations to international negotiations or trade missions ; no staff exchanges between the industry and government departments ; far greater periods between leaving a ministerial role and parliament , and consulting for an oil and gas firm , for example , with a complete ban on any sitting parliamentarians doing that kind of work , paid or otherwise ; no implicit endorsements from politicians as a result of their speaking alongside industry representatives , or at events with which the industry has any kind of association ; and certainly no fossil fuel company sponsorship of political party conferences . last year , chevron co - hosted an event at conservative party conference with the tagline : “ can fossil fuel companies play a role in the energy transition ? ” we know that the only role that they want to play is one of delay and obfuscation , so why should they be able to pay to get privileged access to ministers and potential ministers ? the hon . lady will be surprised to learn that i agree with some of what she has said . it would certainly be wrong of such companies to lobby ministers on any interests that they have . she will know that my views on these matters long predate any such interests — and for the record , i never lobbied any minister on any matter connected with the interests that she has described . i thank the right hon . gentleman for his intervention , and i understand , of course , why he would want to make it . i would simply say that there is concern around perceived influence as well as direct influence . i have no reason to doubt for a second what he has just said — i am sure that it is absolutely true — but at the same time , when people outside this place look at the facts that i have been laying out this evening , in a dispassionate way i hope , alarm bells will start to ring , at the very least . we are talking about an industry that has a massive impact on the future of our planet , and i think it right , given the access that it appears to have to people in high places , to have this debate and raise those questions in this place . does the hon . lady agree that , although we all roughly agree that we need to get to net zero , the biggest problem is the pace of change ? the fossil fuel industry has successfully lobbied us all to say , “ not so fast ! you ca n’t do it so fast . do n’t pull the rug from under our feet . ” that is the biggest danger we face , because if we miss the target , there is no point talking about net zero . we have a 2050 target and we need to reach it urgently ; we can not delay any further , or go at a slower pace than necessary . i thank the hon . member for her intervention , which reminds me of a powerful thing that the us campaigner bill mckibben says : delaying is the new denial , and winning slowly is the same as losing . there is a real imperative here to be fast . i congratulate the hon . lady on securing this adjournment debate , and on the strength of her arguments . i echo the points made by would the hon . lady add to her list the need to reduce the overall cost of politics ? an article i read recently estimated that spending in the forthcoming general election will dwarf anything that has happened before . the expenditure on social media alone will be greater than for the last official campaign period . political parties go looking , as they are at the moment , for vast amounts of money to spend on electioneering , but it comes at a cost , because the funders who give them that money then want something in return . i am very grateful to the hon . gentleman for his intervention and his kind comments . it is always a great pleasure to work with him , and i agree entirely : when it comes to spending on elections , we seem to have an arms race that is out of control , which of course drives the obsession with getting more money to line the war chests that enable parties to fight those elections . a cap on that funding is urgently required , which brings me to the next point i wanted to make . to take the points that my hon . friend i thank the hon . gentleman for his intervention . it is incredibly disappointing that labour has , in a sense , not followed its own logic ; it is happy to say that it will not accept any new licences , but if labour were to make the clear statement right now that once it got into power — if it did — it would revoke those licences , that could have a chilling effect on all the licences that are going ahead . they are going ahead at a huge rate , and the government want to see them go ahead even faster . when an official opposition has it in its power to stop that process and chooses not to , “ disappointing ” is too polite a term , frankly . i was coming to the issue of dirty money in politics . i want to see an end to it , because it comes with strings attached that are tying up in knots our chances of a liveable future . there can be no conceivable justification for allowing the fossil fuel lobby to directly or indirectly buy favours from politicians , so there should be no donating to mps or to political parties , and no donations in kind , whether that is to all - party groups or via football tickets , event sponsorship or trips overseas . at the same time , the rules on conflicts of interest need redesigning to shut out vested fossil fuel interests , not simply have them declared on the record . it is time to close the revolving door . no side jobs or cosy secondments ; no blind trusts , putting things in the name of one ’s spouse , or raking in money from shares or second jobs ; and of course , much tougher sanctions for breaches of the rules — including suspension , for example . thirdly and lastly , the preferential treatment meted out to the fossil fuel industry must come to an end — most immediately , the handing over of public subsidies and other incentives for fossil fuels must end . most notably , that comes in the form of favourable tax regimes , which in the past have resulted in oil companies paying less than $ 2 in tax per barrel of oil pumped from the north sea , compared with the $ 15 per barrel that companies pay if they are operating in norway . the hon . lady is making some excellent points . does she agree that it is quite frustrating to look at the regime in norway , which collects more tax , meaning that the people of norway have a fund for the future , while we will not have anything at all by way of legacy benefits from the oil and gas industry — only an unliveable planet , if things continue as they are ? i thank the hon . lady very much for her eloquent intervention . she is exactly right . she underlines the point that stopping these vast subsidies for the fossil fuel industry is not only the moral thing to do , or in the interests of the climate ; it is in the economic interests of the future of this country . the wealth fund in norway is a very good model that we could , and should , have followed . what i have described is one of the countless ways in which our politics is siding with and enabling the fossil fuel sector , as well as the banks , lawyers , lobbyists , consultancies , think - tanks and many others that feed off it . those companies should have no place in our politics ; if they do , it is undemocratic , and deeply dangerous for climate action , given that their priority is putting forward policies that actively and significantly undermine the uk ’s climate commitments . instead , we should seek to change politics into a force that sides with the economic writing on the wall , and the only chance we have of a liveable future : a transition to a climate - safe future with the public we are elected to serve . i will bring my remarks to an end with three questions for the minister . first , can he tell me who in government has overall responsibility for monitoring the influence that fossil fuel companies have as a result of their political lobbying ? secondly , can he confirm whether the government are satisfied that the checks and balances in place are sufficient to ensure that parliamentarians are not influenced by fossil fuel lobbying ? thirdly , does he agree that this goes to the very heart of how government and parliament are run , and therefore warrants the establishment of , for example , a new dedicated select committee to properly and regularly scrutinise the influence of the fossil fuel industry , and indeed other corporate influence on political decision making , as well as to make recommendations for change ? we are talking about not just the impact on climate but the standing of parliament in this country . i think many people look at this place and draw conclusions that are not particularly favourable ; it looks as if we are out for ourselves . we need to clean up politics , both because it is the right thing to do and because it might be just one step towards beginning to rebuild our reputation with the british public . i congratulate i am pleased to be able to respond to some of the points that the hon . lady raised . she made the case that the interactions between representatives of fossil fuel companies , political figures and those in public life should be transparent . the government believe that lobbying is a legitimate part of political development in all areas , as long as it is conducted transparently and ethically to maintain the highest standards in public life . the government outlined wide - ranging improvements to transparency around lobbying in their “ strengthening ethics and integrity in central government ” policy statement of july 2023 . these include revising guidance to widen the range of lobbying engagements declared by departments , and linked reforms to the consultant lobbying framework . these measures , when implemented , will ensure that all lobbying activity , irrespective of which sector is being represented , will be conducted openly and in accordance with the principles expected of participants in public life . in the uk , a number of systems ensure that lobbying activity is conducted honestly and transparently . taken together , these systems , which set the rules for the consultant lobbying industry , ministers and government departments , members of parliament and political parties , ensure that it is clear whose interests are being represented in public life . the register of consultant lobbyists , created by the lobbying act — the transparency of lobbying , non - party campaigning and trade union administration act 2014 — has significantly increased transparency around the work of consultant lobbyists since its creation in 2015 . the register makes it clear whose interests are being represented by consultant lobbyists , and provides accessible online information about those undertaking consultant lobbying and their clients , as well as details of investigations into alleged breaches of the act . the act also established an independent registrar of consultant lobbyists , who has powers to monitor and enforce compliance and administers the register of consultant lobbyists . the register of consultant lobbyists complements existing transparency mechanisms , including the quarterly publication of ministerial meetings with external organisations , business appointment rules and industry - led regulation , such as subscription to industry codes of conduct . from january 2024 onwards , meetings held between ministers and consultant lobbyists will be declared through routine quarterly transparency . this will also apply to those senior officials who are subject to meeting declarations . new transparency guidance was published on gov.uk in december 2023 , detailing stricter minimum standards for meeting descriptions , to ensure that declarations contain relevant , constructive information . as i said , new guidance expands the scope of transparency declarations for senior officials to include meetings held between external organisations and individuals , and directors general , finance and commercial directors , and senior responsible owners in the government ’s major projects portfolio . the code of conduct for members of parliament sets out the standards of behaviour expected of ministers , and the rules on the registration and declaration of interests . the code provides that members must fulfil conscientiously the requirements of the house in respect of the registration of interests in the register of members ’ financial interests and must always be open and frank in declaring any relevant interest in any proceeding in the house or its committees . it is for the standards committee , not the government , to consider any changes to the approach to the registration of interests . the minister is obviously going through the existing architecture that is supposed to guard against undue influence from lobbyists , corporations and so on . i wonder whether he would agree with his presumably former colleague , now lord pickles , who admitted that the office of the advisory committee on business appointments is toothless , and that work does need to be done on that . if when a member breaches the rules they simply get a letter telling them , “ you should not do that again , ” that will hardly be a sanction that anyone will be particularly worried about . obviously , the government take seriously anything that lord pickles says , and i certainly do . he was my predecessor in brentwood and ongar , and i hold him in high regard . there is a process by which such comments are considered , and we will continue to go through it . i hope the hon . lady will appreciate that a chunk of the framework that i have just set out is new , and it is important that we give it a chance to work . what governs a lot of our thinking — perhaps where we diverge from her — is the fact that we can not envisage a situation in which it would be wise to shut energy companies out of the discussions . we consider them to be fundamental to the transition to net zero . we also believe that some may have a role when we get to net zero and that it is clear that some fossil fuels will be necessary even when we reach that destination . consequentially , the secretary of state for energy security and net zero and her ministers regularly met a wide range of stakeholders to discuss issues relating to energy security and net zero . of course , that includes meeting oil and gas companies and representative organisations , as well as environmental organisations and charities . for a sector that supports around 200,000 jobs and is at the forefront of the drive to net zero and the energy transition , where the workforce is transferable to green jobs of the future , that is a responsible position to take . the prime minister has reiterated that net zero is a priority for this government , and we remain absolutely committed to meeting our legally binding net zero target . more than ever , we are determined to adopt a fair and pragmatic approach to net zero that minimises the burden on working people . no other country has matched our record on decarbonisation . unlike most other countries , the uk ’s climate commitments are set in law . the uk is a net importer of oil and gas and a fast - declining producer , hence new oil and gas projects simply reduce the fall in the uk supply ; they do not increase it on current levels . the new offshore petroleum licensing bill will not undermine those commitments . the minister is being generous with his time . he will know that just today the climate change committee issued an interim report saying that the government are off target when it comes to their commitments and the thresholds they are meant to meet . he will also know that the same committee has been pretty critical of , for example , the new offshore petroleum licensing bill . he can not simply rest on his laurels and say that we had a good reputation in the past and therefore things are going to go well now — we are off track right now . secondly , the minister talked about consultant lobbyists , but they are a tiny proportion of who is doing this work . for example , the foreign secretary was not registered as a consultant lobbyist when he worked for greensill . the consultant lobbying issue is , frankly , a complete red herring here . we need to look beyond that at who is speaking to whom and with what effect . alas , i have no laurels on which to rest ; i am merely a junior minister . obviously , the government are keen that we have a fit - for - purpose regime that ensures that lobbying is transparent . that is why we have introduced a number of the changes that i have already outlined . on the report published today by the committee , the hon . lady will have to forgive me because i have not yet had time to consult it , but we always take the committee ’s findings seriously . she will also be aware that it has previously said that , even when we get to net zero , we will still require some fossil fuels for certain purposes . i think it is hard to imagine my right hon . friend breaking any rules , i have to say . i know the authorities will have noted what he said on acoba . the hon . member for brighton , pavilion has clearly articulated her views on how the uk should aim to reach the goal of net zero . that we might differ on that does not detract from the core principle that a range of energy stakeholders all have a role . the government ’s firm belief is that lobbying activity has an important and legitimate role to play in the policy development process , so long as interactions between lobbyists and political actors are properly declared . we support the existing rules , which apply to the lobbying industry , government and parliament — both to individual members and to informal groups and all - party parliamentary groups — and we shall continue to drive forward reforms to improve transparency . the hon . lady might disagree , but in a democratic society , public policy is best informed by engagement and political debate . elected representatives have to meet a wide range of people , not just people they agree with ; that is democratic engagement . such debate should be supported by an independent free press , and then , at the ballot box , we should trust the people . question put and agreed to . house adjourned .