the secretary of state was asked — what recent assessment he has made of the strength of the labour market in scotland . i pay tribute to two great scots who have sadly died in recent days . winnie ewing blazed a trail for women in politics . she was admired by colleagues from all scotland ’s parties as one of the most important politicians of her generation . our thoughts are with her friends and family , particularly her children fergus and annabelle . and with craig brown ’s passing on monday , scottish football lost a true legend who was held in high regard by players and fans across the country . again , our thoughts are with his loved ones . i am encouraged by the resilience that the scottish labour market has shown , despite global issues still causing significant economic challenges . the latest official figures show that scottish unemployment is close to a record low at 3.1 % . i welcome that fact . if we are to grow the scottish economy as well as the national one , it is vital that we have a skilled workforce and the right level of investment . it is also important for areas such as the borders , between scotland and england , to have the least friction in trade and labour market conditions . does the secretary of state agree that politicians of all persuasions have a responsibility to ensure maximum opportunities on whichever side of the border , to ensure the least amount of friction , particularly for those looking for employment ? i agree . that is exactly why this government introduced the united kingdom internal market act ( 2020 ): to protect frictionless trade across the uk . on maximising opportunities on whichever side of the border , it is a matter of some regret that scotland is the highest taxed part of the united kingdom . i call the chair of the scottish affairs committee . the secretary of state and i represent large , rural constituencies with large hospitality and tourism sectors . will he therefore name one benefit that ending freedom of movement has brought to the labour market in either sector ? the scottish national party likes to blame everything on brexit , but for the past two years we have had record immigration into the united kingdom . that is a simple fact — record numbers since immigration figures began . i had the pleasure and privilege of being elected to the scottish parliament in 1999 alongside winnie ewing . she was undoubtedly an iconic figure of modern scottish politics , from the hamilton by - election to madame écosse and the opening of the scottish parliament . i always found her to be kind and sympathetic to new members , and she always had the best stories . may she rest in peace . does my right hon . friend agree that the one thing that will reduce confidence in the scottish labour market is the prospect of another independence referendum — real or de facto ? my right hon . friend is absolutely right . business does not like uncertainty , and the constant harping on about independence is causing uncertainty among business . the devolved administration in scotland should focus on the things that they were set up to do : education standards , the health service , drug deaths and getting some ferries rather than trying to create the island clearances . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the cost of living in scotland . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the impact of cost of living increases on households in scotland . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the impact of cost of living increases on households in scotland . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the impact of cost of living increases on households in scotland . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the cost of living in scotland . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on the impact of cost of living increases on households in scotland . these questions show the originality of thought among the opposition parties . the united kingdom government recognise the challenges facing households due to elevated costs of living and so have taken action to protect struggling families with the largest support package in europe . uk - wide , support to households to help with higher bills is worth £ 94 billion , or £ 3,300 per household on average . over the winter , too many have had to make the decision whether to heat or eat — in fact , too many could not afford to do either . with food inflation well in excess of 15 % , and much higher on specific staple items , people simply can not afford to eat . what advice does the minister have for households in scotland , and those in sunderland who i represent , who are worried about being able to provide food for their families ? inflation is a problem affecting many western economies , particularly those in europe , and it is right that this government continue to provide cost of living support while sticking to our plan to avoid adding unnecessary inflationary pressures . the average household in scotland receives £ 1,850 from the uk government , with the poorest households receiving £ 2,445 . about £ 5.2 billion was spent in 2022 - 23 , which is more than the scottish government ’s entire annual welfare budget . after 13 consecutive hikes in interest rates , the institute for fiscal studies has warned that 1.4 million more householders could face a 20 % fall in disposable income . this mortgage crisis started with a disastrous tory mini - budget last september and is adding to the cost of living crisis . will the minister please explain what the hell his party is doing to clean up the mess it created ? we do not accept that analysis . we recognise that this is a worrying time for homeowners and mortgage holders , but we can not ignore the fact that interest rates have risen across western economies as a result of the pandemic and the impact of the war in ukraine . the government remain committed to responsible economic management to bring inflation back under control , which is the only way to achieve sustainably lower interest rates and mortgage rates . it is not just homeowners who are affected by spiralling interest rates ; they also contribute to an average rent increase of over 8 % . the scottish government are doing their bit , using the limited powers they have . they have extended the rent cap and extended the evictions freeze into march , so that nobody in scotland will be thrown out of their house because they are poor ; and of course in scotland , thanks to the scottish national party , we are not selling off council houses but building more of them . what exactly are his government doing to protect tenants in scotland and to prevent an increase in homelessness ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . i know he recently announced that he will be standing down at the next election , and while he and i clearly do not agree politically , his eight years of service to the people of glenrothes is worthy of recognition . as i said previously , tackling inflation is this government ’s priority . it is the best way to support mortgage holders and the people who rent accommodation . is the minister aware of the recent yougov survey commissioned by feeding britain , which shows that , in may , almost one in six adults in scotland reported that they or someone in their household had accessed food aid in the previous three months ? does he agree that it is now time for the government to launch a food poverty strategy ? will he support the principles outlined in my private member ’s bill to end food bank use by 2030 ? this united kingdom government remain absolutely committed to supporting the most vulnerable in society during these difficult times . that is evidenced by our providing support to people who need it the most : for example , over £ 137.5 billion to pensioners on benefits , £ 67.9 billion on benefits to support disabled people and people living with health conditions , and a further £ 114.3 billion on welfare benefits for working - age adults and children . in addition , since april , benefits and state pensions have been uprated by 10.1 % . this government are taking the action that is most required to support the people in most need , and we reject the hon . gentleman ’s analysis that we are doing nothing . under the last labour government , absolute child poverty levels in scotland fell from 40 % in 1997 to 20 % in 2007 , but that has been all but reversed . the snp government are not on track to meet their own goal of lowering child poverty to less than 10 % by 2030—[interruption . ] snp members shout , but there is a reason why they do so . what steps are the uk government taking to ensure that child poverty returns to the low levels last seen under the last labour government ? the hon . lady is right to highlight the failures of the scottish government , and snp members ’ reaction shows that they do not like being challenged . they shout , heckle and try to shut down any contrary argument . as i said , this government are absolutely committed to supporting the most vulnerable in society . we will continue to support all parts of our society — children , householders and anyone else who needs support during these cost of living pressures . last year , £ 4.2 billion in balancing costs was added to our energy bills . that means paying wind farm operators to turn off their turbines and at the same time paying gas operators to fire theirs up owing to grid constraints and a lack of storage . however , pumped - storage hydro schemes in scotland could create 15,000 jobs and lower bills , so why are this government not fighting tooth and nail to put in place contractual arrangements that would get these schemes up and running ? in relation to the cost of living — the theme of these questions — the energy price guarantee will save households £ 160 for the period until july , bringing the total government support for energy bills to £ 1,500 for a typical household since october 2022 . we are also ending the premium paid by more than 4 million uk households for prepayment meters , bringing their charges into line with those paid by comparable customers using direct debit . this government are absolutely committed to supporting people who face cost of living pressures . i know that the prime minister and the government are entirely focused on helping people to deal with those pressures . however , the focus of the snp government seems to be elsewhere , as we saw last weekend when the first minister announced that the next election would be entirely focused on yet another independence referendum . does the minister agree that that is the wrong priority for scotland , and that scotland ’s two governments should be working together to improve the delivery of public services and help people with the cost of living ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . both of scotland ’s governments — the uk government and the scottish government — should be focused on delivering better public services and supporting people with the cost of living , but instead we hear the snp cheering about another independence referendum . this government remain focused on delivering for the people of scotland ; i am just sad that the snp government in edinburgh fail to do so . i call the shadow secretary of state . let me join the secretary of state in his earlier tributes to winnie ewing and craig brown , both of whom passed away last week , and both of whom will be sadly missed . i hold craig brown personally responsible for moments of completely unbridled joy and total heartbreak . let me also wish the secretary of state a happy birthday — a significant birthday — for next week . [ interruption . ] whoever shouted “ 80 ” from the back benchers is not far away from his age , so happy birthday to him . nearly five months ago , the secretary of state promised to arrange a meeting for david williamson , a scottish terminal cancer patient , but neither his department nor the secretary of state for health and social care has been able to do so . i wonder whether that could be sorted out as soon as possible . millions of people across the country are facing spiralling mortgage rates and rents . statistics released by citizens advice scotland this week show that the number of scottish mortgage holders searching for advice on repossession is up by 341 % . does the minister agree with the insightful advice from the prime minister that worried mortgage payers hit by a tory mortgage premium should just “ hold their nerve ” ? i can confirm that the scotland office did write to the department for health and social care about the case of david williamson , and i will undertake to ensure that we pursue that . as for mortgage rates , the government recognise that this is a very concerning time for homeowners and mortgage holders , but we can not ignore the fact that interest rates have risen across western economies as a result of the pandemic and the impact of the war in ukraine . of course , the bank of england sets the base rate , which has an effect on mortgage pricing — as the hon . member will recall , it was the labour government who made the bank independent of government . as he will also know , last week the chancellor agreed with mortgage lenders a brand - new mortgage charter , which will hopefully provide some protection and reassurance for mortgage holders . the scotland office is saying that scottish mortgage holders should just “ hold their nerve ” . what the minister did not include in his list of excuses was the fact that the tories actually crashed the economy , which has resulted in some of these mortgage interest rates . is it not incredible that during the worst cost of living crisis in living memory the prime minister ’s entire approach is to tell people to hold their nerve , while the approach of the first minister in scotland is to launch proposals for a de facto referendum and a written constitution — something that he himself admits scottish voters do not want ? scotland has two governments so out of touch with the priorities of the scottish people that polling shows that 70 % think they are doing little to help with the cost of living . does the minister agree that what scots need and deserve is a uk labour government focused solely on delivering the priorities of scottish voters ? this uk government are very clear that now is not the time for another independence referendum , but the labour party so often ends up backing snp policy after snp policy in scotland . as we are approaching the summer holidays , perhaps we now come to the snp spokesperson . i thank the secretary of state for his kind words about winnie ewing and craig brown . let me pay my own personal tribute to winnie ewing , who was such an icon for our party and , almost uniquely , served in three parliaments — our own madame écosse . at over 19 % , food inflation in the uk is 50 % higher than among our eu neighbours , yet both the government and the labour party seem to be in complete denial about brexit ’s contribution to this cost of eating crisis . with 28 % of the uk ’s food coming from europe , how will the uk government prevent a new surge in food prices next winter , when extra post - brexit checks are introduced at the border ? as the chancellor has said , food price inflation has been a problem in many parts of europe . in germany , sweden , portugal and poland , food price inflation is around 20 % , so this is not a uk - only problem . the government are doing everything they can to deal with putin ’s invasion of ukraine and the aftermath of the pandemic . we have one central focus , which is bringing inflation down . we are ensuring that is this government ’s one priority . the london school of economics has shown that a third of food inflation in the uk is due to brexit . with the loss of freedom of movement and european workers , brexit has also caused £ 60 million of scottish fruit and veg to rot in the fields , threatening farms and further increasing the cost even of domestic produce . as a brexiteer , should the secretary of state not apologise to the scottish public , including his own constituents , for driving up food prices , and maybe explain why he still supports the proven liar who was one of its main architects ? we do not accept the snp ’s analysis . as i have already explained , food inflation is an issue in many parts of europe . it is a bit rich for an snp member to bring up food price inflation and rising costs , especially when leaked papers this morning revealed that snp ministers in edinburgh are discussing raising council tax by up to 22.5 % , meaning that some people will end up paying £ 751 more per year . under the snp in scotland , local government funding has been gutted , forcing councils to slash local services and impose large tax hikes . i will take no lessons from the hon . member about bringing prices down for households in scotland . what assessment he has made of the potential implications for his department ’s policies on strengthening the union of allegations of standards of impropriety in public life . the united kingdom is the most successful political and economic union in the world — the foundation on which all our businesses and citizens are able to thrive . when we work collaboratively as one united kingdom , we are safer , stronger and more prosperous ; we are better able to draw on the institutions that unite us , such as the health service , the armed forces and our world - class education system ; and we are better able to respond to challenges , such as supporting families with the cost of living and leading the international response to russia ’s illegal war in ukraine . does the secretary of state think that the former prime minister , who was fined by the police and subsequently found to have knowingly lied to the late queen , this house and therefore the public , strengthened or weakened the union ? the union has never been stronger , and this prime minister has said that those in public life should aspire to the highest standards of propriety . i think we can all agree about the importance of politicians telling the truth . in that context , has my right hon . friend seen the video released by the scottish government in which cabinet secretary angus robertson makes a range of spurious claims about devolution being under attack by the uk government ? if so , what does he think of it ? i did see angus robertson ’s video clip , and i think i counted 16 false claims in the space of one minute and 40 seconds . that is a false claim every six seconds — pretty impressive , even by his standards . as usual , the nationalists are desperate to invent a grievance , but the reality is that the uk government respect devolution , support it and strengthen it . the only people who want to destroy devolution are the ones who want to rip us out of the united kingdom . i call the shadow minister . the privileges committee ’s conclusions are crystal clear that the former prime minister knowingly misled this house and subsequently tried to intimidate the very committee carrying out the inquiry he set up . why did the secretary of state not set an example and vote for the privileges committee ’s report ? as i said to the media when this question was raised in an interview last week , it was simply because i felt the report was too excessive in its conclusions . what recent discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on support for the energy industry in scotland . scotland ’s energy industry is vital to supporting the uk ’s energy security . this government have listened to scotland ’s energy industry , and we understand the need to encourage industry investment . that is why we recently announced the energy security investment mechanism , which will remove the energy profits levy if oil and gas prices fall to normal levels for a sustained period prior to march 2028 . it is great to hear a cheer for the secretary of state as he stood up . i am sure he agrees that hydrogen production will be vital to meeting both the uk ’s energy needs and our net zero targets . will he set out what the uk government are doing to promote the development and production of hydrogen in scotland ? low - carbon hydrogen is critical to delivering energy security . it presents a significant growth opportunity and will help the uk to reach net zero . we have doubled our ambition to 10 gw of low - carbon hydrogen production capacity by 2030 , and at least half of it will come from electrolytic hydrogen , drawing on the scale up of uk offshore wind , other renewables and , of course , new nuclear . will the discussions with the scottish government also include the problems with national grid transmission , which means national grid is paying to turn off wind turbines because it can not afford to get the electricity they generate to the south of the country ? by law , transmission network charging is a matter for ofgem , which is an independent regulator . it has recently produced a report on charging reforms , and the government are looking at that report . whether his department has had recent discussions with the scottish government on supporting productive forestry planting in scotland . although forestry is a devolved policy , we continue to work with the devolved administrations to deliver a uk - wide step change in tree planting and establishment . last year , 50 % of forestry planting was much - needed productive forestry for our construction and manufacturing industries . does my right hon . friend agree that there should now be a new uk - wide target that aims for 60 % of new planting to be productive , allowing scotland to lead the way for the rest of the uk ? my hon . friend is a champion for this industry , and it is the uk government ’s ambition to increase planting across the united kingdom . i know she is keen for productive forestry to be used to support the construction and manufacturing industries , which is also the government ’s ambition . scotland , as in so much else , leads the way on forestry and tree planting , at 10,000 hectares , fully three quarters of all tree planting across these islands . can the secretary of state instruct the house on how , around the cabinet table , he has championed scotland ’s progress in this area , or is he too cowering ? not only do i champion it , i plant trees myself . what discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on trends in the level of child poverty in scotland . what discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on trends in the level of child poverty in scotland . this government are committed to tackling child poverty and protecting the most vulnerable in society . in the recent budget , the chancellor announced additional support measures for households and families across scotland and , indeed , across all parts of the united kingdom . a further example of support for families was announced earlier today , with the uk government making childcare more affordable . almost 90,000 food parcels were given to children in scotland last year , and the trussell trust ’s “ hunger in scotland ” report shows that single parents make up only 2 % of the population but 17 % of those who have gone hungry . this is about insufficiency of income . the adult rate of benefits should be restored to single parents under the age of 25 on universal credit , which would be a practical way for the uk government to support them . does the minister agree ? i recognise the work that the hon . lady undertakes with the all - party group on food banks . the government are protecting the most vulnerable , with a £ 94 billion support package for households , and we have helped nearly 2 million people out of absolute poverty , after housing costs , since 2010 . my constituency is not among the poorest in scotland , but we already have one in 10 children there — in some areas , one in three — living in poverty , with two thirds of them in working families . with the soaring food prices , sky - high mortgage rates and edinburgh having the highest increase in annual rents in the uk , families are struggling . we know that our scottish government are only interested in independence , so will the minister tell me what the uk government are going to do for those families ? the government recognise the anxiety that people feel about rising mortgages , which is why the prime minister ’s priority is to halve inflation this year . that is the single best way we can keep costs and interest rates down for people , and we have a clear plan to deliver that . the chancellor also met mortgage lenders last week and has agreed a mortgage charter , covering 75 % of the market . we hope that that will provide reassurance to mortgage holders and others affected by this . before we come to prime minister ’s questions , i am sure the whole house will wish to join me in paying tribute to john angeli obe , director of parliamentary broadcasting , who is leaving the house service at the end of this week . during his 12 years as director , john not only oversaw the expansion of live video coverage to all public proceedings , but delivered the hybrid capability which enabled parliament to function during lockdown and , of course , made history with president zelensky being beamed into this chamber . he has more recently brought live subtitling and british sign language to our proceedings . i am sure i speak on behalf of the whole house in thanking john and wishing him all the best for the future . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear ! ” ] the prime minister was asked — if he will list his official engagements for wednesday 28 june . today , we will have the second reading of the holocaust memorial bill . for decades , survivors such as the late sir ben helfgott showed extraordinary courage in sharing their testimonies so that we would never forget . i hope the whole house will unite today to get this bill through and put those testimonies at the heart of our democracy for generations to come . this morning , i had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others . in addition to my duties in this house , i shall have further such meetings later today . for three years , since i was elected , i have been campaigning to improve health facilities in my community . i am pleased to see significant investment in leicestershire , with £ 14 million for a community diagnostic centre in hinckley and , as part of a £ 20 billion programme , hospital improvements at the leicester royal infirmary and the glenfield hospital . but i am looking for a hat - trick of health in hinckley — i am looking for a day case unit . the money is already there but it is tied up in red tape . i have raised this issue with the health secretary . will the prime minister look to see what he can do , and would he like to come to open the unit next year in hinckley ? i am delighted that since its opening last month the hinckley cdc has already delivered more than 300 additional tests to the local community . my hon . friend will know that it is for the local health authorities to determine how to allocate the nhs budget in their area , but i have no doubt that he will continue to make the case to them for a day case unit in his community . i call the leader of the opposition . mr speaker , may i join your tribute to john and wish him all the best on behalf of the house ? i also join the prime minister in his comments about the holocaust memorial . i would also like to wish muslims across the country a happy eid . last week , the labour party lost margaret mcdonagh , our first female general secretary and a trailblazer in every sense of the word . margaret provided guidance , leadership and loyal friendship to so many in the labour movement . it was not long after i started in this job that margaret was at my door , and i will be forever grateful for the advice and support she gave me . we will all miss her terribly . the prime minister ’s party spent thousands of pounds on adverts attacking plans to build 300,000 new homes a year . at the same time , his housing minister says that it is tory party policy to build 300,000 new homes a year . so is the prime minister for building 300,000 new homes a year or against it ? i remind the right hon . and learned gentleman of our record since being in office : 2.2 million additional homes ; housing starts double the number we inherited from the labour party ; more homes meeting the decent homes standard ; housing supply up 10 % in the last year for which we have figures ; and , also in the last year for which we have figures , we saw a 20 - year high in the number of first - time buyers . that is a conservative government delivering for this country . it was not a difficult question . can he point to a single person , in housing , construction or anywhere , who thinks that he will actually hit his target of 300,000 new homes a year ? anyone ? the record is that in the last three years we have delivered almost record numbers of new home building in every one of those years . he talks about targets , so let us be clear : i promised to put local people in control of new housing and i delivered on that policy within weeks of becoming prime minister . but i am confused by the right hon . and learned gentleman , because first the shadow secretary of state for levelling up , housing , communities and local government , presumably , if he could have identified a single person who thought he would hit his target , he would have told us . there you have the problem : one minute he says he is for building new houses , but the next he is campaigning against them . the truth is that far from delivering , since he crumbled to his back benchers and scrapped mandatory targets , house building has collapsed . he knows it , they know it and every expert is telling them that . why does he not just admit it ? he is not going to get anywhere near his target , is he ? the right hon . and learned gentleman now claims that he supports house building , especially on the green belt , but unfortunately — yes . it ’s good that he agrees that he does believe that now , but unfortunately for him , the shadow deputy prime minister , you can tell from his answer , mr speaker,—his non - answer — and his body language that he has actually given up . his failure is not just shattering the dream of those who desperately want to own their own home ; it is also hitting those who already have a mortgage . because of the government ’s economic chaos , mortgage holders will be £ 2,900 a year poorer . how can the government ever look the british people in the eye again and claim to be the party of home ownership ? i do not think he has noticed that his shadow secretary of state for levelling up , housing , communities and local government , the hon . member for wigan , does not actually agree with his new policy of concreting over the green belt . she has been campaigning against development in her own constituency . she said she wanted to “ prevent urban sprawl ” and “ provide … green space for local people . ” i think that is quite sensible , but it is classic labour — saying one thing here and doing another thing elsewhere . you simply can not trust a word they say . at least he is not claiming they are the party of home ownership any more , because we are . he ’s given up . the prime minister says he is “ 100 % on it ” , but his definition of “ 100 % on it ” is to gently ask the banks to do the right thing . his softly , softly approach , refusing to put mandatory measures in place , risks leaving a million households without support . how many will have to lose their homes before he will stand up for the people his party have pushed into economic misery ? in fact , the vast majority of the mortgage market is now covered by the new mortgage charter that the chancellor has brought in . that is delivering practical help for mortgage holders , allowing them to extend their terms , switch to interest - only mortgages and saving them hundreds of pounds a month . so instead of scaring them , actually there is now practical support in place . it is right that he raised home ownership . that is why we , on the government benches , introduced a 95 % mortgage guarantee scheme . it is why we introduced the first homes and shared ownership schemes to get people on to the housing ladder , and , crucially , it is why we cut stamp duty . now what we see is the highest number of first - time buyers in 20 years — twice the number that the labour party ever managed . it is , “ housing crisis , what crisis ? ” , with this prime minister . he must be the only person in the country who thinks that enough houses have been built in the past 13 years . whether it is those dreaming of getting the keys to their first home , or those already with mortgages , the ambitions of families across the country have been crushed by his failing tory government : house building at its lowest rate since the war because he can not stand up to his own party ; a tory mortgage bombshell because they crashed the economy ; and millions left without support because he will not make lenders put families first . rather than lecturing the rest of the country on holding their nerve , why does he not try to locate his ? as always , the right hon . and learned gentleman has not taken the time to understand the detail of what we are doing , so i am happy to explain it again . it is right that we provide support for mortgage owners , which is why we improved the generosity of the support for mortgage interest scheme . it is why we have introduced the new mortgage charter , which , by the way , goes much further than the labour party ’s policy on protecting mortgage holders . on house building , we are proud to protect the green belt and invest millions more in developing brownfield sites . the simple truth is that that is what i said i would do , and that is what we have delivered . that is the difference between us : i deliver on my promise , the leader of the opposition just breaks his . labour - run kirklees council ’s local plan is seeing hundreds of homes being built on greenfield sites , but the agreed developer levies , the section 106 agreements , which are supposedly for local infrastructure spending , seem to be disappearing into a black hole . does the prime minister agree that agreed infrastructure levies from developers should not be going into a general slush fund ? they should be spent on local roads , local schools and local health services for the communities impacted by those developments . my hon . friend raises an excellent point . that is why the government are reforming the section 106 payment system to ensure that new development is matched by new infrastructure . the current system sees far too little of developers ’ profits going to build new schools , hospitals or transport infrastructure . it is also too slow and plagued by uncertainties and that particularly hampers smaller local developers . it will be replaced by a new , non - negotiable , locally determined infrastructure levy , which will deliver exactly what my hon . friend and others want to see — investment in local communities . i call the snp leader . i wish to start by paying tribute to snp legend winnie ewing and to the former manager of scotland men ’s national team , craig brown , who both sadly passed in recent days , and i send best wishes to all muslims who are celebrating eid mubarak . on sunday , the prime minister patronised the public when he told them that , in the face of ever - increasing mortgage bills , they simply need to hold their nerve . what a nerve ! may i ask him , the near billionaire , when was the last time that he struggled to pay a bill ? mortgage rates are rising because of inflation . that is the root cause , which is why it is absolutely the right policy to halve inflation and reduce it back to target . that does mean that we have to make difficult decisions . that does mean that we have to be patient while those decisions actually have an impact . in the meantime , as i was explaining previously , we are taking practical steps to support mortgage holders across the united kingdom , particularly through the new support for mortgage interest scheme and the new mortgage charter . that answer confirms what we already know — this prime minister is out of touch and the tory party is soon to be out of time . what the public really want is change but , in a week when the conservative party and indeed the labour party both refused to accept proposals for public sector pay rises , while at the same time accepting the economic damage of brexit , is it not the case that westminster offers the people neither real change , nor real hope for the future ? the hon . gentleman just exposes the complete economic illiteracy of the snp ’s position . his first question talks about the challenges posed to ordinary families by higher interest rates , caused by higher inflation . what does his next question do ? support a policy that would increase government borrowing and make the situation worse . that just demonstrates , completely candidly , why the snp ’s approach to economic management is simply not fit for anyone in the united kingdom . local police stations are a key part of communities such as aldridge in my constituency , which is why i continue to make the case to labour ’s police and crime commissioner for saving and strengthening the role of aldridge police station , rather than forcing it to close . does the prime minister agree that any such closure would be reckless , and that police and crime commissioners should be working with local communities and local police teams to provide greater certainty , particularly given the extra 1,376 police officers this government have put into the west midlands ? i am pleased to hear about the extra police officers the government have funded in my right hon . friend ’s community , but i am concerned to hear about the planned closure of aldridge police station . i thank her for raising such an important issue . i know it is one on which she is championing her constituents . as she will know , unfortunately , that is a decision of the locally elected labour police and crime commissioner , and i join her in urging them to think again . diolch yn fawr , lefarydd . the prime minister ’s solution to inflation is to push families into poverty while letting corporate profits pile up . economic illiteracy ? the international monetary fund said this week that the way to cut inflation is for companies to cut their profit margins . it is corporate greed that is fuelling inflation , not workers ’ need for fair play . can he explain to the one in five people in wales facing hunger because they can not afford to buy decent food why they must pay his price for lowering inflation ? actually , my right hon . friend the chancellor met with all the economic regulators this morning and they will be making an announcement later about their plans to ensure fairness of pricing in supply chains to ease the burden on consumers . i am glad the right hon . lady brought up the imf when it comes to tackling inflation . the imf , in its words , strongly endorsed our plan to halve inflation and called our steps “ decisive and responsible ” . as my right hon . friend knows , i have been liaising closely with the department for levelling up , housing and communities and with the treasury with regard to the terrible news of woking council ’s recent section 114 notice . does he agree that , in this scenario , the vulnerable must be protected and local councillors of all parties must work together to try to put the council ’s finances back on the right track ? i know my hon . friend is a great champion for his woking residents . as he knows , the secretary of state for levelling up has intervened in that authority and appointed commissioners to ensure that decisions are taken that provide the best outcomes for residents , including the most vulnerable , and for the public purse . i agree with him that local councillors should be working together with the commissioners to put the council ’s finances in order . the commissioners will submit their first report to the secretary of state setting out progress on the council ’s path to improvement and financial sustainability , and i look forward with him to seeing further progress . the prime minister has had responsibility for the uk economy now for 1,323 days , and he has delivered — he has delivered the largest national peacetime debt ever , the largest tax burden since the second world war , the highest core inflation since 1991 , the fastest interest rate rises since 1989 and the biggest fall in living standards in our history . will he stop lecturing my constituents about holding their nerve , ditch the lame excuses and admit that he is literally the worst person to be leading this country through a cost of living crisis , because he created it ? again , what do we hear from the labour party ? only ideas that would make the situation far worse . it is as simple as that . the hon . gentleman has sat there and supported plans to borrow tens of billions of pounds more . that would make inflation worse . he has sat there and said that we should not stand up to unaffordable union pay demands . that would make the situation worse . and he has sat there and supported plans to not exploit our domestic sources of energy , imperilling our energy security . those are all things that would make the situation worse for british families not just today but for years into the future . this conservative government will keep doing the right thing to support them . my constituents rely on many nearby hospitals : milton keynes , where the government have committed to a new women and children ’s hospital ; stoke mandeville , which has just completed the build of a new children ’s a&e ; but also wycombe , where infrastructure and maintenance issues in the ageing tower are preventing about 2,000 operations from going ahead every year . my local nhs trust has a plan for a new £ 200 million clinical centre at wycombe hospital . will my right hon . friend the prime minister work with me and buckinghamshire colleagues to make that a reality ? although , as my hon . friend knows , we are no longer inviting further schemes to join the new hospital programme , i can tell him that new schemes will be considered through the rolling programme of capital investment in hospital infrastructure . that will secure the building of new hospitals beyond 2030 , and it will mean investment to upgrade the nhs estate across the country . future plans for that will be set out in spending reviews and fiscal events , but in the meantime , i know that he will continue to make the impassioned case for wycombe hospital , and i join him in that . hundreds of steelworkers are outside parliament today , and some are in the gallery , to call on the prime minister to act now to back our vital steel industry before it is too late . will he confirm today that he will match the ambition of the labour party , and our international competitors , to deliver competitive energy prices , invest in green steel production , use uk steel in our procurement systems , and protect us from dirty steel imports by introducing climate measures ? when will he get on with protecting and supporting the industry ? we are proud to support the steel industry and value the contribution that it makes to this country . that is why we put in place the energy - intensive industries exemption scheme , which provides hundreds of millions of pounds of support to steel companies for their energy bills ; we have also introduced the industrial energy transformation fund so that companies can apply for capital grants to help them with the transition and are taking forward plans in the treasury for carbon border adjustment mechanisms to ensure a level playing field . that is also why , during the pandemic , i stepped in to support financially a steel company in wales . sadly , despite five years of lobbying , the commonwealth parliamentary association international branch will leave the united kingdom . as you know , mr speaker , that is of great concern to the house and , although it is perhaps a little niche for our constituents , it is important . the cpa needs special status , but the government have not granted that by way of a short bill or an amendment to an existing bill . could the prime minister , at this late stage , this month , do something about that because otherwise the association will be gone , never to come back ? the united kingdom values the work of the commonwealth parliamentary association . my right hon . friend the foreign secretary has made it clear that he does not want the cpa international to relocate . he wrote to it in march to confirm that officials from the foreign , commonwealth and development office would work with the cpa to find a mutually acceptable solution to the status issue , and i look forward to seeing progress . mr speaker , your constituents and mine have been made a promise by the prime minister : inflation at or below 5 % by the end of this year . so let me ask the prime minister what will happen if he fails to meet that promise . will it be yet more ranting on about the labour party , or will it be the general election that my constituents crave ? no , we are sticking to the course of bringing inflation down . what the labour party needs to understand is that that requires making difficult and tough decisions ; it requires prioritising ; it requires being able to say no when people come asking you to borrow more money . those are the types of responsible decisions that i and the conservative government will make because they are the right ones for the country . for over 160 years , southport pier has been at the centre of our visitor economy , welcoming visitors from far and wide , including from chorley , mr speaker . it has stood the test of time , but the mismanagement of labour - controlled sefton council has closed our pier . businesses are concerned , and the impact on tourism will be huge . will the prime minister condemn the council ’s actions and support my campaign and efforts to work with this conservative government to get our pier open ? i welcome my hon . friend ’s commitment to the important community assets in his constituency , such as the historic grade ii - listed southport pier . i am pleased that he has succeeded in getting the government to provide £ 2 million to undertake improvements as part of the coastal community fund , and that comes alongside the landmark £ 35.5 million town deal for southport — the second largest town deal in the country . this is my first opportunity to put a question to the prime minister for the residents of the city of chester , so why does the prime minister think it is acceptable for sewage to be pumped into the beautiful river dee , which flows through chester , for the next 27 years ? of course it is not acceptable , and that is why this government have gone further than any other in tackling the issue , committing to monitor 100 % of storm overflows and to an investment programme of £ 56 billion to upgrade infrastructure , enshrining strict targets in law , and introducing unlimited fines for water companies . but when it came to talking about those policies in this house , the labour party could not even be bothered to turn up and vote for them . later today , parliament will welcome apprentices from around the uk who work in the aerospace industry , and i am very much looking forward to meeting callum and britney , who are apprentices at collins aerospace in my constituency . will the prime minister join me in celebrating apprenticeships in the aerospace industry and encourage colleagues to attend and meet their apprentices ? i join my hon . friend in celebrating everyone doing an apprenticeship and in encouraging everyone to go and meet their apprentices later today . i pay tribute to callum and britney in particular . my hon . friend is right to highlight the importance of the aerospace industry , particularly because of our new defence co - operation agreement with italy and japan to build a new generation of fighter aircraft , which will create thousands of new jobs across the country , many of which will come through apprenticeships . that is an example of this conservative government providing opportunities for the next generation . last year , 1.7 million children missed more than 10 % of their schooling , 125,000 were absent more than they were in school , and a further 140,000 were completely missing from formal schooling . this safeguarding and educational catastrophe is happening on the prime minister ’s watch . yesterday , the schools minister told the education committee that primary legislation is required to initiate a national register of children missing from education so that we can find out where they are . will the prime minister commit to bringing forward the necessary legislation as a matter of urgency to combat this crisis for our children ? i agree with the hon . gentleman that children missing school is a tragedy and is incredibly damaging for educational outcomes , which is why during the pandemic and afterwards we invested £ 5 billion to help children catch up with lost learning . it is important that we continue to deliver on those plans , and we will of course ensure that we work with the sector to have more children attending school more often . economic recovery and reconstruction will be vital to ukraine when it comes to rebuilding a free and sovereign nation . so will my right hon . friend help to galvanise the expertise of the uk ’s private sector to strengthen ukraine ’s recovery and economic prospects after this devastating war ? time and again ukraine has shown its ability to rapidly harness innovation and creativity , and i know that its economic recovery will be no different . my hon . friend is right to highlight that private sector expertise and investment will be critical to that recovery . i was pleased that over 400 world - leading companies pledged to back ukraine ’s reconstruction at the successful recovery conference that the uk hosted the other week . we are doing our part as well , with a $ 3 billion world bank loan guarantee on top of all our other investment . i think the conference showed that there is enormous momentum across the world to support ukraine ’s recovery , and that recovery and ambition are being led by the united kingdom . a university student in lewisham east has seen her rent rise by £ 200 a month due to the mortgage rate increases . she is now at risk of homelessness and can not return to the family home . she has no choice but to use food banks , even though she has two part - time jobs . not only is she falling behind in her studies ; she is falling further into debt and falling into depression . what does the prime minister say to constituents like mine who are paying the dual price of this government ’s cost of living crisis and their mortgage rates crisis ? we have taken significant action to help families across the country , most notably by taxing the windfall profits of energy companies and using that money to pay around half the energy bill of a typical family , including all of the hon . lady ’s constituents . that support is worth £ 1,500 , and i am pleased that energy bills are forecast to fall by £ 430 when the price cap resets in a couple of days . beyond that , there is considerable support for the most vulnerable in our society , including £ 900 in cost of living payments for those on universal credit and additional support for pensioners and disabled people . that is what we will continue to do . we are heading into the fifth week of sandwell labour ’s refuse strikes . we have had flying pickets , reports of the gmb blocking ambulance workers from getting out of their depot as a result of its picket lines , and a police and crime commissioner encouraging the police not to police it . i ask my right hon . friend to convene a meeting urgently so that we can resolve this , and perhaps he will join me in telling labour politicians — one in particular — to grow a spine and put people before their paymasters . more ! order . we have done very well — don’t spoil it now . my hon . friend put it very well : he has illustrated exactly the issue . the labour party is unable to stand up to its union paymasters and back our plans to introduce minimum service and safety levels in critical industries . that is the type of practical action that supports working families , and it is action that the labour party is not strong enough to support . after the events in russia at the weekend , it is unclear what the future holds for the wagner group , but the catalogue of crimes it has committed across africa and the middle east and , of course , in ukraine can never be washed away . despite all that , the government do not yet have a permanent cabinet office official to co - ordinate all the organs of government to pursue the criminals in the wagner group . will the prime minister appoint one and , crucially , will he fund the collection of evidence of wagner group war crimes that have been committed across the world , so that no matter what happens , these criminals can be brought to justice in future ? we have consistently condemned the wagner group , and we carefully monitor its actions in ukraine and the wider world that the hon . gentleman has mentioned . we have designated both the wagner group and its leader under our sanctions regime , and we support international mechanisms that hold individual mercenaries in the wagner group to account for violations of international law , but i reassure the hon . gentleman that we are also working very closely with our partners to counter the malign use of such proxies , both by russia and more generally across the continent . on monday night , an illegal traveller encampment was established in bretton park . on saturday , the much - loved bretton festival is due to take place in that park . this house passed legislation that gives police more powers to tackle illegal encampments . will the prime minister make it clear from the dispatch box that he expects the police to use those powers on these encampments , which blight public spaces and public parks in places such as peterborough ? we absolutely recognise the misery that unauthorised encampments can cause to local communities . that is why we have delivered on our manifesto commitment to give police the powers they need to tackle those people in unauthorised encampments who are causing harm . of course , how the police use those powers is an operational matter for chief constables , but we would not have legislated for them if we did not expect chief constables to use them . i am told that home office officials are liaising regularly with the national police chiefs ’ council on this exact matter . rose — final question — martin docherty - hughes . in the past couple of days , yet again we have been reminded that a member of the other house was appointed contrary to the recommendations of mi5 . we learned from a channel 4 film that even the monarch was asked to be involved because whitehall officials were so opposed , given that the person was deemed a security risk to the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland . so i ask the prime minister : does he agree with mi5 , or does he agree with his predecessor that that peer should still be in the other house ? mr speaker , for obvious reasons i will talk in more general terms . the house of lords appointments commission vets cross - bench and party political life peerage nominations to the house of lords and , where appropriate , seeks advice from government departments and agencies . the house of lords appointments commission has previously undertaken that , were a prime minister to recommend a peerage against the commission ’s formal advice , it would write publicly to the relevant parliamentary select committee . that completes prime minister ’s questions . we come now to the urgent question . [ interruption . ] if people could stop having conversations in the middle of the chamber , that would be helpful , mr slaughter . ( urgent question ): to ask the secretary of state for environment , food and rural affairs if she will make a statement on the financial resilience of the water industry . water is what makes life possible on our planet , and it is essential for our health and wellbeing , as well as for our economy , including the production of food and clean energy . the government are taking significant steps to ensure that the water industry is delivering the outcomes that bill payers expect and deserve . water companies have invested £ 190 billion since privatisation in 1989 . in april , the government published the plan for water , bringing together more investment , stronger regulation and tougher enforcement capacity for regulators in relation to those who pollute . ofwat and the government take the financial resilience of the water sector very seriously . ofwat is the independent economic regulator for the water sector and has responsibility for its financial resilience . the sector as a whole is financially resilient . ofwat continues to monitor the financial position of all the key water and waste water companies . ofwat reports annually on the sector ’s financial resilience , and ofwat ’s latest annual monitoring financial resilience report shows that the water sector is financially resilient . market confidence in the sector is demonstrated by new acquisitions , such as pennon ’s purchase of bristol water , and by shareholders being willing to inject new capital . ofwat has taken steps in recent years to strengthen the sector ’s position . that includes action to update the ringfencing provisions in water company licences to better safeguard the interests of customers , and barring water companies from making payouts to shareholders and removing money or assets from the business if they lose their investment grade credit rating . ofwat has outlined that water companies must be transparent about how executive pay and dividends align to the delivery of services to customers , including environmental performance . since privatisation , total capital investment has outstripped dividends by 250 % . on the scale of government commitment to the water industry is highlighted by the integrated plan for water , and by our commitment to the financial resilience of the sector in delivering for customers and the environment . thank you , mr speaker , for granting the urgent question , but it is a concern that the secretary of state did not proactively make a statement to the house on an issue of such importance . indeed , where is the secretary of state ? one of the largest water companies in britain is potentially going to go to the wall , and the secretary of state is missing in action . it was clear to anyone looking on that a culture that allowed vital investment in ending the sewage scandal and tackling water leaks to be sacrificed in favour of a goldrush for shareholders was never sustainable . just last year , as raw human sewage was being pumped out across the country , £ 1.4 billion was paid out to shareholders . now , all that was warned about is coming to pass : leaks are leading to water shortages ; sewage dumping pollutes our rivers , lakes and seas ; and the only thing on the up is debt , at £ 60 billion . the conservative party ’s cycle of privatising profit , usually for multibillion - pound foreign sovereign wealth funds , and nationalising risk is not sustainable , and neither is it a fair deal for working people . the news we are seeing is the result of the conservative party ’s failed “ profit above public interest ” experiment , in which it handed over the water industry at a knock - down price to private enterprise , together with the entire infrastructure serving the nation . that was almost unique to water . for instance , when rail was privatised , the tracks were not sold off . with water , however , the lot was handed over , with few safeguards for our national interest , our national security or bill payers . when was the minister ’s department first made aware of the financial situation at thames water ? has her department had any reason to believe that those responsible at thames water would not be able to meet their licence conditions or legal obligations ? if this means a taxpayer - funded bail - out , how much will that cost and how will it be paid for ? what assessment has she made of the liability of uk pension funds that are invested in thames water , and in other water companies considered to be at risk ? given where we are , will she confirm her confidence in the financial regulator ? finally , given what we see with thames water today , does she have concerns about any other water companies , or does she consider this to be an isolated case ? in the department for environment , food and rural affairs , we have our individual portfolios , and i am the water minister . the secretary of state has full confidence in her ministers when sending them to the dispatch box . the shadow minister raised the issue of debt . for information , debt to equity fell last year by 4 % in the water industry , actually making it more resilient . since privatisation , capital investment in the water industry has been 84 % higher than it was pre - privatisation — we need to get that out there and on the table . in terms of thames water , it is not for me to comment on the individual financial position of a water company . we have an independent regulator that is doing that ; indeed , that is what the regulator , ofwat , is for . water companies are commercial entities , and it is for the company and its investors to resolve any issues . the government , of course , are confident that ofwat , as the economic regulator of the water industry , is working closely with any company that is facing financial stress . i call the chair of the select committee . sewage treatment plants are all too often overwhelmed at times of heavy rain . as well as installing stormwater tanks , such as the new 4 million litre stormwater tank in scarborough , does the minister agree that we should do more to encourage homeowners to harvest grey water , which can buffer the effects of heavy rain , and use that for such things as flushing the toilet ? i thank my right hon . friend for broadening the scope of the debate . we are in discussions with the department for levelling up , housing and communities — many of these issues involve working with other departments — on grey water harvesting and better using the rain that does fall . a farmer in devon whom i visited was collecting all the water from his farm buildings roofs to supply his animals . in assessing , as the minister has explained , the resilience of the water industry , what assessment is she making of the impact on uk pension funds if a major company such as thames water fails , as is being widely suggested in the press ? there is a structure and a process for working through this matter . it is up to the individual water companies and the regulator working with them to ensure that they are resilient . that is why ofwat reports annually on how resilient each water company is . if that flags any issues , ofwat works closely with them , because we need our water companies to be fully functioning . we need to attract investment — a huge sum of money has been invested since privatisation , as i mentioned earlier — in infrastructure to give our customers the kind of service they deserve . we should also be mindful that it is not all piled on to customers ; we have to share the load . it is worth making the house realise that it was the opposition who voted against the environment act 2021 , which gave ofwat more powers . can my hon . friend assure me that the water regulator ofwat will be able to clamp down on excessive cash payouts and ensure that water companies put their customers first ? i thank my hon . friend for pointing that out . he is absolutely right : whatever the opposition say today , one of the measures they did not vote for in the environment act 2021 was to enable ofwat to hold water companies to account where they do not demonstrate a link between dividends and performance . they must have sound performance and be performing for their customers , otherwise they can not pay out their dividends . the staggering complacency we are hearing from the minister will come as no comfort to my constituents who were flooded out three years ago in the west london floods , which were the second 100 - year event in less than a decade . if ofwat has been doing such a good job in holding the water companies to account , as she is now apparently telling us , why are we in this situation ? what exactly has ofwat been doing ? it has to be remembered that privatisation occurred in 1989 . we have had a succession of different governments during that time , and it has been this government who have accelerated clamping down on water companies and opening up transparency . the hon . lady asks what ofwat has done , and i will name just a few things . since 2020 , ofwat has updated the licences so that if a water company loses its investment credit rating , it is barred from making payouts to shareholders . in july 2022 , it set out additional proposals to increase financial resilience , including companies having a stronger credit rating . in march , it announced that it would take enforcement actions against water companies that do not link dividend payments to performance . we have done more than any government before to ensure that we have a fully functioning , strong regulator . on financial resilience , has the minister taken the opportunity to consider the hotchpotch of policies coming from opposition front benchers on the subject ? under their prescription , they would seek to take all the profit of water companies to invest in capital expenditure . that would undermine the financial resilience of those companies that rely on private capital for investment in tackling this problem . in the one part of the country where labour does have responsibility — wales — has she noticed that the sewerage overflows are almost double the rate per overflow pipe as in england ? i thank my right hon . friend for pointing that out ; i can not support more strongly what he said . we have a private system , and ofwat says that it is financially resilient . we need investment in these companies to make them function properly . obviously , we need to hold the companies to account , but we need to see enormous investment . everything in the government ’s plan for water , including the storm overflow discharge reduction plan , is fully costed . we are not pulling the wool over people 's eyes ; we are telling them clearly what this will mean and how it will deliver the water services that we need . thames water , which is on the verge of going under , provides a quarter of the population with their water supply . when was the minister told about its financial plight ? what is the plan if the worst comes to the worst and it does go under ? the hon . member is right that thames water supplies an enormous part of our population . ofwat has been working closely with thames water , as it does all water companies , and the government work with ofwat , giving it our strategic policy statement on what its priorities will be . overall , the water companies are considered resilient , and much work is going on behind the scenes with thames water to ensure that customers will not be affected . if necessary , there is a process in place to move us to the next stage . swindon residents will be concerned about the future of thames water , so i ask my hon . friend please to keep me and colleagues updated on any issues relating to that . underlying this issue , labour ’s model will clearly never work — we must understand that only the private sector will be able to invest . [ interruption . ] labour members bleat now , but they did nothing about it when they were in government . is the point not that where we have in effect a private monopoly , the regulator must be as effective as possible ? will my hon . friend do everything possible to ensure that ofwat is working in the full interests of customers ? aspects of its operation do not seem to pass that test . i thank my right hon . and learned friend . thames water is a big water company that delivers on a wide scale . ofwat is working very closely with the company on its plans , which will be looked over and submitted , and accounts will be submitted in due course , so that we have a resilient pathway . customers , including his constituents , should rest assured that both their water and wastewater supplies will be protected . this privatised industry knows that , at the end of the day , the banker of last resort is the british taxpayer . that is exactly where we are with thames water , which has been taking profits for the last 35 years and not investing for the future . regardless of what went on before , we must have investment in what is in front of the industry , but thames water has failed to plan ahead . it has taken money but not done the job expected of it while being in charge of such an essential public service . what will the government do to protect consumers and ensure that we plan ahead for the industry ? ofwat is the independent regulator and , as the hon . member will know , the government direct it through the strategic policy statement . it is ofwat ’s job to ensure that in the price review , when the water companies submit their plans — they are going over the draft plans now — they demonstrate that they will deliver on the government ’s targets on storm overflows , leakage and demand reduction . it is for ofwat to ensure that companies will be resilient in delivering that infrastructure . there is a firm structure in place . ofwat also constantly monitors companies ’ gearing — debt - to - equity — levels , and the government are confident that the regulator is taking reasonable measures to challenge companies to reduce those gearing levels where appropriate . about a quarter of the country ’s economic output is in sectors under regulators , including the water industry . with ofwat and in other sectors with ofgem and the financial conduct authority , we have seen regulators not performing to the standards that the public , or indeed industry , would expect . if we are honest , we in this house and in parliament do not have the toolkit to assess regulators ’ performance on a systemic basis year in , year out . will my hon . friend work with ministerial colleagues to see whether we can improve the regular oversight of regulators such as ofwat so that we can take a more rounded view on such issues , rather than have them come through urgent questions as brought by the opposition ? i thank my hon . friend for that . it is essential that we have fully functioning regulators . since the government came to power , ofwat has done an enormous amount to streamline what it does , improve transparency , change licences and make changes so that dividends are not paid if any environmental damage is being caused . the government have directed that through the strategic policy statement . indeed , our targets will ensure that the regulator enables the water companies to put the right measures in place . he is right , however , that one should never be complacent , and if things need to be improved through the regulators , they should happen . but i assure him that a big effort is being made . many of my constituents are hugely worried about reports of thames water being on the brink and what that could mean for their bills . thames water has been managed appallingly : leaks have not been dealt with , sewage has been continually dumped and the former chief executive officer sarah bentley needed to be asked to forgo her bonus . all the while , the government have been missing in action . why are the government yet again running to catch up — nothing in the minister ’s statement gives confidence that they have a grip — with our constituents paying the price ? where water companies underperform and do not meet their targets , a process is in place whereby basically they have to credit the money back to their customers . last year , £ 143 million was credited back in that respect . so the regulator does have the tools to do that . it has tightened up so many of its measures , all of which will affect all the water companies.[official report , the minister will not be able to comment on thames water ’s finances in detail , but can she assure my constituents , who will be really worried , that , whatever happens , their day - to - day services will be protected and the much - needed upgrades will still be delivered ? i thank my hon . friend for that . he is right that customers come first , and thames water customers will be assured their water supplies and wastewater services . i am happy to meet him to discuss that . residents in twickenham , teddington and the hamptons will be extremely worried to hear that thames water is on the brink of collapse , but they are also fed up to the back teeth with this company . not only does it pump sewage into our precious river thames , but recently we have seen sewage flooding our streets at times of flooding from rainfall , and there are now plans to pump treated sewage into the thames at times of drought . that is indicative of the company ’s underinvestment in fixing leaks and being stripped to the bare bones while lining executives ’ pockets . all the while , the government have been missing in action and the regulator has failed . will the minister back the liberal democrats ’ proposals to reform water companies into public good companies , transforming their boards and priorities in the interests of the environment and consumers ? i will highlight the thames super - sewer — it will be ready to open in the not - too - distant future — which is a tremendous project for the people of london , including many of her constituents . we have a privatised system , whose financial resilience , as i have reported , has increased rather than decreased in the last year . these companies attract money from investors so that we can get what we need . the government have costed plans . the liberal democrats have no costed plans for what they suggest they might do with the water companies , nor plans for where the money will come from . it is worth pointing out to opposition parties that 93 % of all uk coastal bathing waters meet good or excellent conditions . in north norfolk we have lost three blue flag beaches , which went from excellent to good . but guess what ? there is not a single reason why they lost that flag . under the environment agency ’s marking , it looks like it is down to not combined sewage overflows but entirely natural phenomena . could the minister help me get my blue flags back and hold the environment agency to task , to ensure that it has a proper testing regime that transparently shows that we have excellent bathing water quality all over north norfolk ? i thank my hon . friend for raising the issue of bathing water quality . since privatisation we have virtually the best quality water coming out of our taps of almost anywhere in the world . we also have phenomenal results for our bathing water areas—93 % are classed as good or excellent . he has concerns about his area , but i hope those beaches will soon be back up to blue flag status . the environment agency works closely on individual cases where concerns have been highlighted . i am happy to put him in touch with the environment agency or work with him to find out what those individual cases were , so that we can get those beaches back up to the fantastic standard that they deserve . today , not for the first time , most of my constituents have little or no water supply . two years ago , not for the first time , hundreds of my constituents had their homes flooded with raw sewage . year after year , thames water has failed its customers while obscenely rewarding its management and shareholders . no one will miss the asset strippers at thames water if it goes under . all we want is working infrastructure and good customer service at a reasonable cost . is that too much to ask ? that is what we want for all our customers . that is why we have launched our plan for water to pull everything together to ensure that we deal with any pollution incidents , water supply issues and the future of the water industry . it is why we have set our targets and produced our storm sewage overflow plan , and why the water companies will have to spend £ 56 billion on capital investment by 2050 to address that . every water company , including thames water , has to make an action plan for each of its storm sewage overflows . thames water will do that . when they were privatised , water companies had all the debt written off , so they started with zero . since then , they have borrowed £ 53 billion , much of which has been used to help pay £ 72 billion in dividends . the investment has been made by borrowing and putting it on to customers ’ bills . now , the ratings agency s&p has negative outlooks for two thirds of the uk water companies it rates , because they are over - leveraged and took out too much debt in an era of low interest , which they now have to pay back . this is not a triumph but a huge problem for the resilience of our water industry . what will the minister do when water companies start falling over ? for information , thames water itself has not paid any dividends for the last six years . ofwat will rightly hold companies to account when they do not clearly demonstrate the link between dividends and performance . we made that possible through the landmark environment act.[official report , i want to bring the minister back to the figures we have just heard . water companies had no debt when they were privatised . since then , they have borrowed £ 53 billion , and much of that has been used to help pay £ 72 billion in dividends . meanwhile , we have an appalling sewage scandal , particularly in the south - east of england . the failing company southern water , which my constituents have no choice but to rely on , is considering raising bills by £ 279 per year by 2030 , largely to pay for the investment that it should have been making in previous years . does that not show that the privatisation of water was a serious mistake that needs to be permanently rectified ? privatisation has enabled clean and plentiful water to come out of our taps . it has unlocked £ 190 billion of funding to invest in the industry . that is the equivalent of £ 5 billion annually , and is double what we had pre - privatisation . i am not saying that there is not still a lot of scope for improvement . i have stood at this dispatch box many times , as has the secretary of state , to say that some actions of water companies are completely unacceptable . that is why we have introduced the storm overflow plan and our plan for water . as two members have said , funding and loans to the water companies are a huge issue , as that is where they have paid their dividends from . on shareholders , we have foreign investors taking huge amounts of money away from this country , and we need better fund managers who are able to assess where they put their money . they should be held accountable , too . ofwat has not been doing what it is supposed to do . i believe that the chief executive of ofwat applied for a job at thames water . that shows what the companies are doing and how ofwat works with them — rather than scrutinising them , people are looking for the next job . we have to stop that and stop my constituents paying more for water . they need decent water in their homes and in the environment around them . that is what we want the government to ensure . this tory policy has failed for years . i am not sure what the question was . we want the same things : value for customers , and clean and plentiful water . we want to hold the water companies to account . we want them to invest the money needed to deliver the right services . that is why we have a plan for water , our targets and the measures in the environment act . it is why the regulator ofwat has taken all the actions i mentioned to increase the transparency of water companies and to ensure that money is not being paid out if there is any environmental impact or performance negativity . in the last year , a number of my constituents on the westfield estate have had their homes and gardens flooded with raw sewage . yorkshire water accepts that it is its sewage , but does not accept responsibility to help with the clean - up . will the minister look at the legal position to ensure that water companies are held accountable ? in the meantime , we should put pressure on yorkshire water and others to pay for the clean - up that my constituents are having to fund themselves . the hon . gentleman will know that we have put huge pressure on the water companies , which now have to invest £ 56 billion in infrastructure to deal with sewage issues . if he wants to meet me to talk about that issue , i will be happy to . back in january i asked the water minister whether she thought that the current system of regulation was fit for purpose , and she said yes . i ask her again : does she still think that it is ? yes . water companies were sold with no debt when they were privatised in 1989 . in fact , they were given a £ 1.5 billion green dowry by the government . since then , they have taken on borrowing of £ 60.6 billion , diverting income from customer bills to paying dividends and interest payments . as a result , water bills have increased by upwards of 40 % in real terms . does the minister honestly think that consumers hail privatisation as a success ? ultimately , the customers pay for investment in the industry , but over a very long period , as the hon . lady will know . if a company did not pay out dividends it would struggle to get access to finance to fund future investment . that would limit the level of investment and have an impact on future customers . companies have to pay up front for a lot of that investment , because they need to secure a large amount of funding to pay for it . to avoid customer bills increasing drastically to pay for that , companies have to secure the money by raising debt or equity . she knows how it works . the regulator has to ensure that that system is fully functioning , the water companies are resilient and we have all the resilient water supply that we require . it has been reported that the companies are drawing up their business plans for 2025 to 2030 and that , on average , they are looking at a 25 % increase in bills . given what we have heard today , would billpayers in my constituency not think that rather than paying extra to water companies , they may as well just flush their money down the drain for all the good it will do to improve water quality , services and investment in infrastructure ? all those plans are being assessed right now . the draft plans go to ofwat , where they are analysed with a fine - toothed comb . all the things i have mentioned today will be scrutinised , so that we can deliver the infrastructure that is needed and have the clean and plentiful water supplies we require as well as a clean and healthy environment , with no undue impact on customer bills . all those things have to be taken into account to deliver the water supplies that the people we meet and the people we serve deserve . the british public should not be asked to cover the cost of failures by the water monopolies and their shareholders . they have borrowed extensively to pay dividends while failing to make necessary investments in infrastructure and resilience . does the minister agree that if the government are compelled to take thames water into public ownership , it should stay in public hands ? i am not aware of the situation the hon . gentleman is referring to . ofwat is working very closely with thames water to ensure that the business is viable , that customers are not impacted , and that water supply and waste water services are delivered . as i mentioned , ofwat has strengthened many measures so that we have a much more resilient industry in the future . indeed , those changes and the fall in the debt to equity ratio demonstrate that we do have a more resilient industry . we have seen bonuses and dividends put ahead of investment in infrastructure or maintaining sufficient reserves . our area of devon and somerset is covered by south west water ; the company has paid out £ 112 million in dividends this year , despite having just £ 144 million in reserves , which is £ 2.5 billion less than it had two years ago . this week , a water firm chief executive officer has resigned , but no conservative minister has ever taken responsibility . when will a conservative minister finally take responsibility and get a grip , or step aside ? as the hon . gentleman knows , ofwat has announced new measures to enable it to take action against water companies that do not link dividend payments to performance . that is just not happening . i think he needs to look again at some of the stats he has just quoted , because i think they might relate to the wider pennon group . i have just visited south west water to have a really forensic look at its systems and how it delivers water . that is what we do with our water companies . it is ofwat ’s job to hold water companies to account , and it has just got measures through the treasury so that it has another £ 11.3 million to tackle enforcement . i thank the minister for her answers . we are ever mindful that house building is important , and development opportunities are critical to the future as well , so with developers being charged more and more to connect to the network but facing delays in those connections being installed , what plans does the minister have to make the connection system for new developments more affordable ? the hon . gentleman raises an important issue . we always have be mindful of costs , not just to customers through their bills but to developers building houses . we are working closely with the department for levelling up , housing and communities on a range of measures and on its planning guidance , so that we can tackle a range of issues connected to water , working with developers on things like rainwater harvesting and sustainable urban drainage systems , which will really help the whole of our water infrastructure . on a point of order , mr speaker . i think the minister may have inadvertently misled the house . she said clearly that thames water has not been paying out dividends . the reality is that thames water has not been paying out dividends in the usual way , but it did pay dividends last year to the parent company , so it has been paying out dividends . does the minister wish to respond ? yes , mr speaker . i will check the wording , because i would hate to mislead the house . if i have inadvertently said something incorrect , i will happily put it straight on the record . right . with permission , mr speaker , i would like to make a statement on improving safety in mental health in - patient services across england . before doing so , i want to thank all the right hon . and hon . members from across the country who have campaigned tirelessly on behalf of their constituents to improve mental health care . too many people have experienced care in mental health in - patient settings that has been well below the high standard that we all deserve when we are at our most vulnerable . i would also like to put on record my sincere condolences to the families and friends of those who have lost their lives . first , i will update the house on the independent inquiry into mental health in - patient care across nhs trusts in essex between 2000 and 2020 . i thank my right hon . friend i also pay tribute to my right hon . friend in 2021 we launched the independent inquiry to investigate the deaths of mental health in - patients across nhs trusts in essex between 2000 and 2020 . the government appointed dr geraldine strathdee , a former national clinical director for mental health for nhs england , to chair the inquiry . i want to place on the record my thanks to dr strathdee and her team , because a lot of good work has been done . i applaud the bravery of all the victims and their families who have come forward to tell their stories . i also recognise the work that the essex partnership university nhs foundation trust — eput — has done to assist with the inquiry . the trust has been in the spotlight , and progress has already been made to learn lessons and improve in - patient mental health care . eput ’s chief executive , paul scott , joined in 2020 , and since then the trust has invested £ 20 million in its mental health in - patient wards and a further £ 20 million in community services . compared with 2019 , patients absconding from care has decreased by more than 60 % , and the use of inappropriate restraint has fallen by 88 % . however , in january dr strathdee raised concerns with me about a lack of engagement with the inquiry by current and former eput staff . i know that many right hon . and hon . members share her concerns . since then , the inquiry and the trust have worked together in a concerted effort to increase staff engagement . none the less , i have listened to dr strathdee ’s concerns that the inquiry still needs further staff engagement to get victims ’ families the answers they deserve . in a letter to me in march , she said that “ 30 percent of named staff , those essential witnesses involved in deaths we are investigating , have agreed to attend evidence sessions . in my assessment , i can not properly investigate matters with this level of engagement . ” she has also raised with me concerns about ongoing safety issues at the trust . to quote from her letter once again , she said : “ i am very concerned that there are serious , ongoing risks to patient safety . due to the nature of these issues , i am confident that these can not be properly investigated by the inquiry without statutory powers . ” the government take both concerns extremely seriously , and i agree with dr strathdee that we have now reached the point where the only appropriate course of action is to give the inquiry statutory powers . statutory inquiries do take longer , but this does not mean that work will start from scratch . dr strathdee ’s existing findings will inform the next phase of the inquiry . she has informed me that , owing to personal reasons , she will not be continuing as the inquiry ’s chair , so i want to thank her once again for all her commitment and hard work . i am sure the house will agree that she is a true public servant . our work to find her successor is proceeding at pace , and i will update the house on the progress of setting up the inquiry in due course . i recognise that members ’ concerns about mental health in - patient facilities are not confined to essex . the government are committed to improving mental health care across england , which is why we are boosting mental health funding by at least £ 2.3 billion this year compared with four years ago , why we are making urgent mental health support available through 111 , and why we are delivering three new mental health hospitals to provide specialist care and cut waiting lists . in january , we commissioned a rapid review of how data is used in in - patient mental health settings in england . more effective use of data has the potential to reduce duplication , ensuring that healthcare professionals can spend more of their valuable time with patients . the review team — well led again by dr strathdee — heard from more than 300 people representing every part of the in - patient mental health sector , including former patients and frontline staff . dr strathdee has made recommendations for how data and evidence can be used to identify risks to patient safety and failures in care more quickly and effectively . the findings and recommendations of the rapid review will be published today , and i will deposit a copy in the libraries of both houses . the government will consider its findings carefully and respond in due course . we recognise , however , that patients and families want to know how their concerns will be taken forward as soon as possible , and i also recognise that a wide - ranging statutory inquiry relating to other settings , or covering multiple patient safety issues , would not deliver those answers quickly . my department has therefore agreed to work alongside the healthcare safety investigation branch to prepare for the launch of a national investigation of mental health in - patient services , which will commence in october , when the hsib receives new powers under the health and care act 2022 . the new health services safety investigations body will investigate the following themes : how providers learn from deaths in their care and use that learning to improve services , including post - discharge services ; how young people are cared for in mental health in - patient services and how that care can be improved ; how out - of - area placements are handled ; and how to develop a safe staffing model for all mental health in - patient services . across all those areas , it will explore the way in which providers use data . i want to reassure the house that the new body will have teeth and will work at speed , that it will have the power to fine those who refuse to give evidence when they are required to do so , and that its predecessor ’s investigations were typically concluded within a year . i hope that today ’s announcements will be of some comfort to the bereaved families who have done so much to raise awareness of the failings of mental health care in essex and elsewhere . i want them to know that the government are committed to obtaining for them the answers that they deserve , and to improving mental health across the country . i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow minister . i thank the secretary of state for advance sight of the statement . however , it beggars belief that it has taken the government so long to address the house on this matter . it seems that every month there are new scandals regarding needless loss of life and dehumanising behaviour in in - patient mental health settings . that must be stamped out now — these are people ’s lives . that brings me to the subject of essex partnership university nhs foundation trust . i welcome the announcement today that the inquiry will be given vital statutory powers , because for several years families who have lost loved ones at the trust have been calling for the inquiry to be given those powers . the grieving families i have spoken to have told me about the pain and anguish they have felt during their fight for answers , and that has only been compounded by an inquiry that lacked the necessary powers to seek the truth . i must pay tribute to those families for their tireless campaigning and effort . in particular , i thank melanie leahy , who has fought for too long to achieve the announcement that has finally come today . i hope that melanie , and every other family , will now start learning the truth . dr strathdee has been a powerful advocate for the essex inquiry , and we want to express our thanks to her for the work that she has already put in . the next inquiry chair must continue her work , and hold the confidence of the families who have been impacted in essex . i have repeatedly called on the secretary of state to give the essex inquiry statutory powers , and i am pleased to see that he has finally listened to our calls , but why were families left in the lurch for so long ? following months of scandals in in - patient mental health hospitals , public confidence is falling . more than one in three people say that they do not have faith that a loved one would be safe if they needed hospital mental health care , but every patient must be treated with dignity . i have repeatedly asked ministers whether they have visited failing trusts . the minister refused to answer , so will the secretary of state commit himself to greater transparency ? the secretary of state has announced that urgent mental health support will be made available through 111 , but 1.6 million people have been left languishing on waiting lists for mental health treatment , their condition deteriorating and reaching crisis point . it is welcome that we will finally see the publication of the rapid review today — better late than never — but labour has been calling for in - patient mental health settings to be reviewed in the light of these serious failings , and any rapid review should have had patient voices at its centre rather than being simply the data exercise that the government commissioned . when we look at the planned national investigation into in - patient services that they will conduct alongside the health services safety investigations body , we see that , yet again , there is no mention of working with patients and their families . where is the learning ? where is the focus on what staff need in these settings ? are the government looking at additional training needs , given that mental health care relies on staff and not simply on shiny equipment ? let me turn briefly to the planned consultants ’ strike , about which the health secretary has said absolutely nothing . yet again he has been missing in action . for my consultant colleagues to have voted to strike is extraordinary , and the risk to patients of seven days of strike action is intolerable . next week marks the 75th anniversary of the nhs , and it has never been in a worse state . the country is clear about who is to blame . it is not nurses , it is not junior doctors , it is not consultants , and it is not paramedics ; it is this conservative government . they have lost control of the nhs , they have lost the confidence of nhs staff , and they have lost the support of the british people . the only ballot that we need now is a general election . it is a shame that the hon . lady chose to conclude her remarks in such a way . let me address that head - on . it is bizarre to accuse a minister who is literally at the dispatch box of being missing , particularly when the shadow health secretary , having managed to turn up for prime minister ’s question time , has failed to turn up for this statement . it is even more bizarre that , although we are constantly told that the labour party sees parity between mental health and physical health as a key priority , when it actually comes to debating the issue , the contrary is clearly on show . this debate is not about the issues normally raised during prime minister ’s questions about the politics of the day ; it is about the families who have tragically lost loved ones , about how we can learn the lessons from that , and about how we can ensure that we get the data right , get the support for staff right , and get the procedures right so that other families do not suffer loss . we have responded to the excellent points made by dr strathdee through her rapid review about data . there are two elements to that : there is data that is collected that does not add value , is often duplicative and takes staff away from giving care — that is somewhere that we can free up staff — but there is other data that is needed to better identify issues early , and we need to look at how we improve that data . specific issues arose in respect of engagement by staff , and we have actively listened and responded to the concerns raised by families and by many members of the house , particularly about the essex inquiry . i will come on to those as i go through the wider issues . the shadow minister mentioned speed . of course , there is a balance to be struck between the completeness of a statutory inquiry and the greater speed that is often offered by other independent inquiries . indeed , the paterson inquiry was a non - statutory inquiry commissioned through the department , and that is another vehicle that is often successfully used . there are also inquiries commissioned through nhs england , such as the donna ockenden review . there is often a balance to be struck between those inquiries , given the speed at which they can proceed , and a statutory inquiry , which has wider powers but often takes longer . it was because of our desire to move at pace to get answers to families that we initially commissioned a non - statutory inquiry , in common with bill kirkup ’s inquiry into morecambe bay and inquiries into many other instances in the nhs . however , we have listened to families and to right hon . and hon . members who have raised concerns about the process and , in particular , the engagement by staff , and decided to make it a statutory inquiry . the shadow minister asked about our commitment to transparency . the very reason that we set up the rapid review in january was to bring greater transparency to the data . that is why i will be placing in the libraries of both houses the outcome of the rapid review . that speaks to the importance of transparency as we learn the lessons of what went wrong in essex and in other mental health in - patient facilities . the shadow minister made a fair point about waiting times . we are committed to cutting waiting times , including in mental health . that is why we are spending £ 2.3 billion more on mental health this year than four years ago , we have commissioned 100 mental health ambulances , we have 160 different schemes looking at things such as crisis cafés to support people in a&e , and we have schemes such as the review through 111 and the funding the chancellor announced in the budget for mental health digital apps to give people early support . of course , that sits alongside other mental health interventions , such as our programme to train more people to give mental health support in schools . the shadow minister made an important point about working with families . i agree with her about that . hsib will be meeting families — indeed , ministers have been doing likewise — and we are keen that that should feed into the terms of reference , both for the statutory inquiry and for the hsib review . we have touched on consultants , but let me make a final point on that . as far as i am aware , the opposition do not support a 35 % pay rise , whether for junior doctors or for consultants , but if that is their position , perhaps they will tell us whether this is yet another area that the stretchable non - dom contribution will reach to . exactly how will it be funded ? this is a serious issue . the measures that we are taking address the concerns of families who have suffered the most tragic loss . it is important that we learn the lessons , both in essex and more widely . we have actively listened to the points raised by dr strathdee , who has done a fantastic job . it is right that the work moves on to a statutory footing , but it is also right that we look more widely at the lessons from other mental health in - patient facilities . that is exactly what we intend to do . first , let me put on the record my personal thanks to the secretary of state and ministers for their honest and frank engagement with colleagues and with bereaved families , whose concerns they have listened to . it was my constituent melanie leahy , who was at one stage a constituent of my right hon . friend there are still 80 - plus families who did not engage with the inquiry led by dr strathdee , to whom i pay tribute . the statutory inquiry will give them the confidence and courage to come forward , speak up and share what will be — we should be frank about this — deeply harrowing evidence . will the secretary of state expand on how evidence received by dr strathdee ’s inquiry will be treated ? i know that he said he will come back to the house on the processes . we are interested , in particular , in the inquiry ’s terms of reference . importantly for bereaved families , what measures will be in place to support people to come forward and give evidence ? there have been too many barriers in that regard for families and , if i may say so , those who have been employed by eput . what involvement will the families have in drawing up the terms of reference ? they are the ones that need confidence in the process . again , i thank dr strathdee , and i thank the secretary of state and ministers for their engagement . in my discussions with my right hon . friend and colleagues , i found the compassion that they showed and the way they championed the family voice compelling . i absolutely agree that it is important that families take confidence from the decision to move the inquiry on to a statutory footing and come forward with their evidence . i know that she plays an active part in that . of course , we want families to be part of the discussion on the terms of reference . i know that , with her significant experience , my right hon . friend is keen to be part of that too , and we are keen to engage with her on it . my right hon . friend is right to highlight the evidence that has already been gathered through the excellent work of dr strathdee . i had a meeting with her yesterday to ensure that we capture that as part of the work that is moving forward . i hope — i reinforce my right hon . friend ’s point — that families will take confidence from today ’s announcement and that those families who have not come forward to date will be able to do so . i know that in my right hon . friend they will have a resolute champion supporting them to do so . i , too , welcome the secretary of state ’s statement , but i am disappointed that he did not say more about the serious risks that we have raised in the house — not least about timely access to services and the significant risk that many of my constituents have faced out in the community — in respect of tees , esk and wear valleys nhs foundation trust , which serves york . i wonder whether he can expand on that , and on his proposals for taking things forward at the trust . i am meeting one of his ministers next month , but i would like to hear his position on addressing the serious concerns that have been raised . the hon . lady raises a very valid point . there are real concerns about tees . we considered that when considering the scope of the statutory inquiry . given that significant work had been done in essex , we decided to strike the balance by putting that on a statutory footing but enabling work to proceed at pace through hsib on tees and some other areas . the hon . lady will know that the care quality commission prosecuted the trust in may for a regulation 12 breach , and that significant work has already gone in ; the report of the system - wide independent investigation was published last march . they are very serious issues on which i think there is concern across the house , and we stand ready to work with her and other elected representatives from that area as part of the wider work . it is a deep , deep tragedy that , over the 20 - year period , around 2,000 people lost their life under the care of mental health services in essex . families and survivors are right to want transparency and accountability . given the slow progress of the independent inquiry , it is right that it now moves to a statutory basis . when i spoke in westminster hall , i shared the testimony of a constituent who had been an in - patient in the early 2000s . she described being raped by another patient and being laughed at by staff when she asked for support . she described being able to make many suicide attempts , absconding from the ward and overdosing . she described how staff refused to treat her self - harm injuries and how she was repeatedly restrained and forcibly injected . i put on record my incredible respect for the people who are coming forward to relive their horrors and share their testimony . they are doing this because families and survivors want to know that change is embedded so that lives are safeguarded now and in the future . will my right hon . friend give assurance to my essex constituents that mental health services in essex will now be given the support they need to keep vulnerable people safe ? having discussed that harrowing evidence with my right hon . friend , i do not think any minister could either forget it or not be moved . i found it an extremely moving experience to hear her talk about the experiences of a number of her constituents . she is right to praise those who come forward , and to recognise that it is often a difficult ask to relive the most awful circumstances , but it is important that families come forward so that we learn lessons and ensure this is not repeated . my right hon . friend is also right to highlight the two broad elements of learning the lessons of what happened in the past and maintaining services for the future . i am therefore happy to give her an assurance that we will work closely with her on support for essex as lessons are learned through the statutory inquiry and as services continue to be delivered . we are working closely on that with the chief executive . my thoughts are , first and foremost , with the bereaved families and all those involved , because this process must be utter agony for them . it is right that the inquiry is put on a statutory footing . in his statement , the secretary of state quoted from a letter he received from dr strathdee , in which she said : “ i am very concerned that there are serious , ongoing risks to patient safety . ” the secretary of state did not expand on that , and i do not know whether he is able to do so . if i may extrapolate , we know that , more broadly , there are risks to patient safety when there is not enough workforce and when there are not enough beds . hertfordshire is the most under - bedded area of the country . when we see the workforce plan , potentially this week , will it include estimates of the number of qualified mental health staff we need in in - patient settings , nhs community settings and schools ? will he meet me and my local mental health trust to discuss the number of beds we have in the county and our plan to expand them ? dr strathdee did not particularly focus on staffing numbers , as far as i recall ; she focused on some of the issues with care from staff . that was the nature of the concerns . on the ongoing risk , part of the reason why we commissioned the rapid review was to look , in particular , at the quality of data . there was a quantity of data that was not effective , and that often distracted staff from spending time with patients . there were also gaps in the quality of data that needed to be filled , and the document that will be placed in the libraries of both houses speaks to that point . that is why we are so keen to move at pace on learning lessons . i welcome that sentence and the seriousness and speed with which this is being taken forward . as a now non - practising consultant psychiatrist , i have a variety of declarations in this area , which are best summarised in the pre - legislative scrutiny report on the draft mental health bill . my constituents are waiting for the rebuild of the abraham cowley unit in my constituency , but the framework under which patients are looked after is very important . people in in - patient settings are , by definition , some of the most vulnerable people looked after by the nhs , and a fair proportion are a detained population . could the secretary of state update the house on how soon we will see the government ’s response to the pre - legislative scrutiny committee report on the draft mental health bill and when we expect the proper bill to be brought forward ? my hon . friend is right to highlight the importance of pre - legislative scrutiny , into which he had a personal input . i am hugely grateful for his work and the work of baroness buscombe and others . i met baroness buscombe some months ago to discuss the outcome of that pre - legislative scrutiny . i do not have a date to share today , but i am happy to write to my hon . friend with a further update . many of my constituents depend on mental health services provided by the south london and maudsley nhs foundation trust , which provides a range of services for very vulnerable people across a large part of south london . the in - patient service includes cleaning and catering facilities , and it is vital that those services are run well so that well - trained professional staff are able to treat mental health patients . some of the trust ’s staff are contracted to a company called iss , and they have been on strike . does the secretary of state agree that iss should come to the table and discuss the issues of the pay dispute so that staff can provide the cleaning services for mental health professionals to continue with their vital jobs ? we are investing more in mental health services as a whole , and that includes the important area of cleaning and catering services . obviously , it would be inappropriate for me to comment on that specific contractual dispute , but industrial action , in its wider sense , is clearly disruptive and i am very keen for it to be resolved as quickly as possible , whether in the context of consultants or cleaning and catering services . i welcome my right hon . friend ’s statement and the move to put the eput inquiry on a statutory footing . he mentioned that putting it on a statutory footing means it will take longer . on behalf of constituents and those who are keen to get closure on these important issues , can he give any kind of indication of when the findings might be available ? the chair is to be appointed , and given that statutory basis and the independence of the chair , it would be wrong for me to pre - empt the terms of reference . people can look to other statutory inquiries and come to a conclusion . the inquiry is not starting from scratch , and part of the reason we originally went with a non - statutory inquiry was because of the desire for speed . of course , dr strathdee has done a huge amount of work and it will be available to the new chair of the statutory inquiry . one can look to other inquiries and draw conclusions , but i would expect it to move more quickly in this instance because a significant amount of work has already been done . i welcome the statutory inquiry , which is a step in the right direction . i also welcome the secretary of state ’s focus on families . ensuring family involvement in the care of mental health in - patients not only improves patient outcomes but enables proper scrutiny and questioning of care . in regions such as the south - west , many patients facing the most serious mental health crises receive care outside the region , which is often a long way for families to travel . is he considering the increased commissioning of local provision so that families can know their loved ones are being well cared for ? many families will be concerned about the statement and the experiences of patients in essex . the right care and the best care for many patients is closer to home . the hon . gentleman raises an extremely important point , and he is right that a particular downside of out - of - area placements is often the distance from families . indeed , one can see in the data that there is often a corresponding uptick in issues of harm . the crux of his point is very valid . that is why we are committed to building new facilities , with three new hospitals for mental health announced in the statement i gave on the new hospitals programme ; that included three new mental health ambulances . this is also about preventing people from needing in - patient care through our crisis cafés , our earlier intervention in community services and the interplay with 111 . more fundamentally , it is about giving greater power to commissioners on a place - based basis . the reforms through integrating health and social care , having fewer targets from the centre and allowing more devolved decision making mean that those areas that want to put more money into in - patient mental health , for example , have greater flexibility to do so . the point the hon . gentleman raises is extremely important and it is exactly what we are facilitating . as my right hon . friend observed , a non - statutory inquiry is generally more fleet of foot than a statutory one . it is so disappointing that the failure of staff to engage in that process has brought us to where we are now . that would indicate a very poor culture and sets the tone for how this inquiry will be taken forward . let me remind him that one reason we are so anxious to get the mental health act reformed is that kind of behaviour towards patients . too many in - patient settings see patients as an inconvenience to be managed , rather than having their real welfare at heart . will he therefore redouble his efforts to make progress on this , because many people who have been through the other side want to see that progress ? first , i do not want to wait for legislation before we make changes . indeed , under the leadership of paul scott , who joined eput in 2020 , investment has been made , with an extra £ 20 million being put into the in - patient wards and a further £ 20 million into community services . we are keen to make further progress on that . on the wider issue of legislation , i know that my hon . friend , as a former government whip , is particularly acquainted with how the legislative process works , but the government take her comments , and those of the house , on engaging staff in this process seriously , and we are working very actively on that . it is vital that the government work with sector experts and those with lived experience of in - patient mental health services in getting this vital area of policy right . as someone who spent almost a month as a psychiatric in - patient back in 2021 , i know at first hand how difficult , disorientating and dehumanising these settings are , at a time when you are at your most vulnerable , and how easily things that are well - intentioned can and do go wrong . will the secretary of state therefore commit to working with mind and other organisations giving patients and their families a voice to shape these improvements , to ensure that any changes happen with patients and their families , and not to them ? i very much agree on that . the hon . lady speaks powerfully of the importance of engaging with those with experience — the charity sector , the families and those directly impacted by the decisions taken in in - patient mental health facilities . she makes an extremely pertinent point and it is very much part of the approach we are taking . i thank the secretary of state for mentioning our great friend sir david amess . i am sure that , if he were still with us today , he would welcome this statement , as do i , as does his successor and , as is clear , as do all other essex mps . the secretary of state has done the right thing and should be commended . eput has been a troubled organisation for some time , although i believe that its chief executive , mr paul scott , is genuinely trying to turn it around . as we look back to find out what went wrong — some things clearly went very badly wrong — will the secretary of state work with the chief executive , providing support and resources , not just to make sure this does not happen again , but to try to help eput improve in the future as well as examine the past ? i know that my right hon . friend was particularly close to sir david and is uniquely qualified to speak of his interest and involvement in these issues . i am happy to give him the reassurance that he seeks on working closely with the chief executive and the leadership team there . i know from my engagement with colleagues across the house that they will be closely involved in this in the weeks and months ahead . south london and maudsley is the mental health trust that covers my constituency . this year , as a direct result of the secretary of state ’s wider policies , slam is cutting £ 45 million from services . he has said today that he wants to improve mental health care and that he takes safety concerns seriously , but when will those words be meaningful for mental health care for patients and their families in southwark ? the meaningfulness of those comments can be seen in the fact that we are putting this inquiry on a statutory basis ; the £ 2.3 billion additional investment compared with what we had four years ago ; the crisis cafés and the other schemes we have , as part of the 160 schemes we are bringing forward ; and our willingness to innovate in mental health through the use of mental health digital apps . there is a whole range of initiatives because that is the right approach . across the house , it has been recognised that in the past mental health did not get as much focus as physical health , which is why we are investing more . again , the house recognises that covid has brought more focus to these issues , which is why this is a priority for the government . today ’s statement is a further continuum in that effort . i thank the secretary of state for his attitude to this issue and the time he has put in . i fully support the points he has made about non - statutory and statutory inquiries . it was right to start off non - statutory and to change when the situation changed and we were not getting what we wanted . i reflect on the comments of my right hon . friend my hon . friend makes extremely important points , and i absolutely agree with him . indeed , i will draw the inquiry ’s attention to the points he raises . he is right about the trade - off between non - statutory inquiries giving speed and statutory inquiries having a wider range of powers . we have followed the evidence on that , which dr strathdee has shared . there is also a balance between the size of a facility and the quality of the care . data is a key component within that and the rapid review was focused particularly on it . all of us are focused on , “ how do we get the best patient outcomes ? where those have fallen short , how do we ensure the lessons of that ? ” that is what the statutory inquiry is absolutely focused on and it is important that families then engage with it . the care quality commission report at the end of last year said that workforce issues and staffing shortages are the greatest challenge facing the mental health sector . i am sure that that would not have come as a surprise to the health secretary . the glenside campus , part of the university of the west of england , is in my constituency , and it runs mental health training courses for nurses . what conversations is he having with the sector about how we can ensure we get enough mental health nurses trained , so that we get the right people coming through and they are encouraged to stay the course ? the hon . lady ’s point is important , given that in the wake of the pandemic we have seen significant increases in demand , particularly for children ’s and young people ’s services . for example , in a year , the demand increased by 41 % , so there is significant demand , which places pressure on the workforce . that is why the prime minister and the chancellor have committed to the long - term workforce plan , which we will be bringing forward very shortly . we have been engaging with the sector , including the mental health sector , as part of that plan . nhs england has been doing significant work on that in recent months . the background stories to today ’s announcement are truly heartbreaking , and i welcome the statutory inquiry . the secretary of state referred to recent announcements about funding and the 111 helpline . will he expand on what support can be accessed by people , especially young people , if they are going through a crisis right now ? it is extremely important that we get support to young people , because many mental health cases start at a young age . indeed , data suggests that as many as 50 % of mental health cases crystalise by the age of 15 , so it is important that intervention is made early . our programme in schools , for example , is focused on that . it is also important for us to have better community support , which is why we are looking at what mental health support can be offered when people phone 111 and at how we can better scale up the use of digital apps that offer support , given that people often access information through their phones or digital channels in a way that they did not five or 10 years ago . on behalf of my party , i express my sympathy to all the families who have been bereaved and hurt by what has taken place . i thank the secretary of state for his announcement about the statutory inquiry and the new powers . it is clear to those of us in the house who listened to his statement that he is committed to making patients ’ lives better ; we thank him and i put it on the record that he deserves credit for that . i know that the secretary of state is always keen to share progressive strategies and policies with the regional administrations ; he is on record as having said that . it is clear that many lessons can and will be learned , so does he intend to share them with the regional administrations ? i am extremely keen to share our experience , so that we can learn from each other . as the hon . gentleman knows , this is a shared challenge across our united kingdom . the pandemic shone a spotlight on the mental health pressures that many people face , and i am extremely keen to work on a uk - wide basis with colleagues to ensure that we learn from each other as we take these measures forward . given that a recent report into mental health services in york established that communication is a clear concern that is affecting mental health outcomes and safety locally , what specific steps would my right hon . friend take to ensure better communication between primary and secondary care services ? as we all know , that is vital in delivering faster and better outcomes for patients not only in york but across the country . that is an extremely good point . in fact , a key element of the primary care recovery plan looks at the handover points between secondary and primary care , which are often the cause of significant additional work within primary care . we are keen to see where we can ease those pressures , which in turn frees up our experienced gps to do those tasks that require more time , so that is part of the primary care recovery plan . through the rapid review and the focus on data , we are better able to identify where there are gaps or areas of duplication that take clinicians away from spending time with patients . that matters both in secondary and primary care , and it is something that the rapid review has been addressing . i welcome my right hon . friend ’s statement and the publication of the rapid review . while essex is rightly getting its statutory inquiry , it appears that the situation in tees , esk and wear valleys nhs foundation trust will merely be covered by the new powers of the healthcare safety investigation branch . will my right hon . friend confirm that tewv will be covered by the hsib review ? when can families expect to hear anything from that review ? will he keep the need for a statutory inquiry into tewv under review ? it will be covered by the hsib review . on how long that will take , investigations under the predecessor body typically took around a year , which is one of the advantages of the speed at which these things can be done . i hope my hon . friend can see from the statement today that we will follow the evidence , given the decision we have taken to put the essex inquiry on a statutory footing , but the hsib approach has the benefit of speed . i hope that will benefit his constituents , as we learn the lessons . it is worth clarifying that the new body will have much greater teeth , as a result of the reforms that were passed by the house in 2022 . while it is not on a statutory footing , it actually has more power than was the case in the past . that is why we think it is the right approach for learning the lessons in his constituency and more widely . the secretary of state has rightly pointed to the £ 2.3 billion in extra funding and has reiterated from the dispatch box his belief that early support for children ’s mental health is vital . does he agree that this is sadly still patchy across the country ? early access to children ’s mental health services needs to be a priority for all new care systems . i commend to him the approach being taken in north lincolnshire , where that is absolutely the case and where it has been championed by the wellbeing boards and in all our health partnerships . that should be replicated across the country . i commend my hon . friend for the service he gives as a community first responder . through that , i know he takes a huge interest in these matters . as with the point about data , i am extremely keen that where there is good practice , we are socialising that across the country as a whole , rather than having it in pockets . i would be extremely keen to work with him on the lessons coming out of north lincolnshire and on how we scale that across the country , so that good practice can be adopted more widely . indeed , the statement today is about how we will ensure that the lessons from essex can be applied more widely , so that best practice is socialised across the country . i thank the secretary of state for his statement , which will be welcomed by everyone across essex . with permission , madam deputy speaker , i would like to make a statement about the progress we have made towards delivering the genuinely radical childcare reforms announced in the chancellor ’s spring statement . the chancellor announced that from september 2025 , working parents will be able to access 30 hours a week of childcare , for 38 weeks a year , from the term after their child turns nine months to when they start school . i am pleased to announce that from today , the department for work and pensions has raised the amount working parents on universal credit can claim for their childcare to £ 951 a month for one child and £ 1,630 for two or more children . that is an increase of roughly 50 % from the previous limits , which were £ 646 for one child or £ 1,108 for two or more children . the government are also helping eligible parents to cover the costs for the first month of childcare when they enter work or increase their working hours . those parents will now receive up to 85 % of the first month ’s childcare costs back before next month ’s bills are due , meaning that from then on they should have the money to pay for childcare one month in advance . when i have spoken to families on universal credit , many have told me that they have struggled with up - front childcare bills , making it harder for them to get back into work . these childcare reforms support one of the prime minister ’s five key priorities — to grow the economy — by giving families on universal credit up to £ 522 extra each month to cover childcare costs . this is a transformational package that is designed to remove as many barriers to work as possible . the evidence is clear : the earliest years , before a child goes to school , are the most critical stage of a young child ’s development . that is when they are learning most rapidly , and when the foundations are being laid for future success . we are also committed to improving the availability of wraparound childcare . reliable wraparound childcare , before and after school , helps parents to work and can offer children great activities around the school day . the education and care provided in childcare settings up and down the country is pivotal for children . visiting and talking to nurseries , childminders and other providers is one of the best parts of my job . i wish to put on record my thanks for the hard work and dedication of the talented people who work in the sector . i have travelled across the country visiting providers : from chestnuts childcare in shirebrook to kids inc in crowthorne ; from little stars in peterborough to imagination childcare in moredon ; from curious caterpillars in stroud to playsteps day nursery in swindon ; and from bright horizons in didcot to acorn day nursery in emberton . i thank my hon . friends the members for peterborough ( paul bristow ) , for bolsover ( mark fletcher ) , for bracknell ( james sunderland ) , for north swindon ( justin tomlinson ) , for stroud ( siobhan baillie ) , for milton keynes north ( ben everitt ) , for cities of london and westminster ( nickie aiken ) and others for hosting me on those visits . they all share my determination to get this right for parents and providers . when i am out on those visits , i often hear how much of a lifeline the settings are for parents , allowing them to work and develop their own careers , while providing the high - quality early education that gives our youngest children the best start in life . i support the ambitious expansion of childcare support for working parents that the chancellor announced in his spring statement . it represents the single biggest investment in childcare this country has ever seen . it will make sure that parents are able to access the high - quality , affordable childcare that they need . today ’s changes are just one part of our generally radical plans . by 2028 , we expect to be spending more than £ 8 billion per year on early years education , which is double what we spend now . this will build on the 30 hours of funded childcare for three to four - year - olds that this government introduced in 2017 , extending the entitlement to eligible working parents of children aged from nine - months - old to when they start primary school . it will remove one of the largest hurdles that working parents face , and it will save parents £ 6,500 per year on average . we have heard it loud and clear from the sector that getting the funding right is crucial . from this september , we will provide £ 204 million of extra funding for local authorities to increase the hourly rates that they pay providers , and we will make sure that rates continue to go up each year . that means that , from september , the average hourly rate for two - year - olds will go from £ 6 per hour to around £ 8 per hour , and the average rate for three to four - year - olds will be over £ 5.50 per hour . from 2024 - 25 , the average rate for under - twos will be around £ 11 per hour . we will confirm the september rates for each local authority before the summer break . we will also ask the sector for its views on how we should distribute the funding for the new entitlements from april 2024 , including the rules that local authorities will have to follow when distributing the funding to providers . of course , money is not everything . we also want to boost the early years workforce , who are so crucial to the success of nurseries across the country . there are multiple ways that we are doing that . i have heard from many people who manage nurseries that the way that we regulate staffing in settings is stopping providers from making the most effective use of their staff and giving their best people responsibilities that match their abilities . likewise , childminders and nurseries have been telling us about barriers to delivering the education and care that they want for children . that is why we have launched a consultation on proposed changes to the early years foundation stage requirements . every single one of our proposals has come from conversations with people working in the sector . they will give settings more flexibility and help address some of those barriers , while maintaining high - quality provision and keeping our youngest children safe . indeed , 96 % of childcare providers in england were judged good or outstanding at their most recent inspection , which should give parents huge confidence in the standards of provision . some of the new measures will help free up staff to pursue professional development opportunities . we are investing up to £ 180 million in the early years education recovery programme , which offers a package of training , qualifications , expert guidance and targeted support for everyone working in the sector . to train people up , we need to get more people in , so we are also going full steam ahead with a new national campaign early next year to promote the sector and support the recruitment and retention of talented staff . we will also consider how to introduce new accelerated apprenticeship and degree apprenticeship routes , so that new entrants can build careers at all levels of the sector . i wish to reassure members that we will work closely with the sector to deliver these historic reforms , just as we did on previous successful roll - outs of the 30 hours entitlement for three to four - year - olds , the 15 hours entitlement for two - year - olds from disadvantaged backgrounds , and the holiday activities and food programme . we can not do this without early years providers , childminders and local authorities . we have a strong track record of working together to deliver childcare for parents , and i will be listening closely to them when considering our next steps . madam deputy speaker , i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow minister . i thank the minister for advanced sight of her statement . the government ’s realisation of the importance of childcare remains striking , despite what the minister says , for how long it has taken . childcare is important for so many reasons — for giving every child the best start in life , for helping every parent to take on and succeed at the jobs they love , and for the foundation that it provides for success at school and throughout education . above all , as my hon . friend the shadow secretary of state for education has rightly said , childcare is important for supporting families to achieve and thrive together . yet it is only now that the government have arrived at the party . it is typical of this government that they are not only late but focused on tweaks that they trumpet proudly but that do not deliver the scale of reform that is urgently needed . the reforms reflect some of the changes to universal credit that the shadow secretary of state for work and pensions has repeatedly called for . but , as he has also warned ministers , they do not go far enough in giving people the chances and choices to go back to work at the scale necessary to tackle the challenges . on childcare , the government ’s fixation on their broken hours model leaves them blind to the wider challenges around supply and demand of childcare and the extraordinary structure of the market for extra hours . the failure of that market is felt by every family . a decade of sticking - plaster politics from the conservative party has caused them pain . but the announcement does nothing to ensure that childcare places are available in the cities , towns , and villages of our country . in some places , nursery and childcare spaces are outnumbered 10 to one by the children who need them . i am delighted that the minister has visited the seats of so many of her newest and presumably most nervous colleagues , but , as well as talking to parents who have found childcare , she would have done better had she spoken to parents who have not . the announcement does little to deliver the extra staff who will be needed to deliver the extra entitlements for parents that the minister so enthusiastically announces . it does nothing to deliver the childcare places in which our children will be cared for and in which , we hope , they will learn in those extra hours and months of their lives . it is great to hear that the minister will be listening to providers and local authorities , but listening is no substitute for action . it does little to retain or upskill the existing staff in the sector who are leaving in their droves for work that is more clearly valued . it does little to enrich childcare , to drive up quality , to make it a part of our education system , and to deliver a foundation for achievement and success right through school and life . it does little to deliver the flexibility that parents need not merely at work , but to get into work — to get the training and skills that they need and that our companies , communities and country need . in short , the announcement today is little more than a post - dated cheque . it is a promise of jam tomorrow — a promise that brings more questions than answers . madam deputy speaker , let me briefly set out a few questions in the hope that the minister can address them in the debate today . when the 30 - hours childcare entitlement is spread over a year , it is the equivalent of 22 hours a week . what steps is she taking , right now , to address the cliff - edge in costs between the government - funded hours and the hours for which parents have to pay ? will she repeal the restrictions that councils face in making more childcare provision available ? is she genuinely confident that a new advertising campaign will be enough to attract workers to the sector ? is she aware that , for an increase in entitlements to childcare places to work , there must be more staff , and more settings , otherwise more parents will simply find that they can not get the childcare that they need and to which they have entitlement ? finally , how does the minister intend to ensure better uptake of childcare entitlements among eligible families given the complexity and bureaucracy of the existing system ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his reply . let me address some of the points that he raised in turn . the hon . gentleman talked about the ability of parents to look for childcare in the holidays . we have the £ 200 million holiday activities and food programme , which is particularly targeted at disadvantaged children . last summer , more than 600,000 children accessed that . when we did our initial survey of that programme , about 70 % of those children said that they had never been to anything like that before , which is a great sign of the opportunity that it is spreading . he talks about the work that we are doing with local authorities . to understand sufficiency and any challenges , we are contacting every single local authority as part of the roll - out . the hon . gentleman talked about getting more staff , and we have set out some flexibilities ; i talked in my statement about the recruitment campaign we are doing next year . he talks about better uptake , but i would say that the uptake of the offer for three to four - year - olds is in the 90 % range ; for two - year - olds it is in the 72 % range and tax - free childcare in recent years has gone from 172,000 up to 500,000 . yes , there is more to do , but we have very good uptake and any parent thinking about more childcare should look at our childcare choices website to see what they might be entitled to . overall , however , i get the sense from the hon . gentleman ’s comments that he did not listen to my statement . i talked about the £ 4 billion extra that is going into the sector , about plans for staff and for childminders and about routes for apprenticeships . i remind him that it was a conservative government that expanded the offer for three to four - year - olds and introduced the offer for two - year - olds , and now it is the conservative government making the single largest - ever investment into childcare . what do we know about the labour party policy ? we know the opposition wanted to do universal childcare , but they denied that last week . that was last week ’s flip - flop — or i should say one of last week ’s flip - flops . they have talked about means - testing childcare , which would mean taking away childcare from middle - class parents at a moment when we know that families are struggling with their finances . on the government side we recognise that childcare is important for families and important for growth . our childcare plans , as announced at the budget , were called by the international monetary fund a serious point of growth in this country . we recognise that that is important . i call the chair of the education committee . i congratulate my hon . friend on this important statement . i agree with her and , more importantly , i agree with the treasury that childcare is worth investing in . i welcome the changes to universal credit , which i think will make a significant difference , but i particularly welcome the £ 204 million of extra funding for local authorities to distribute to providers ; from what the select committee has heard from providers , that is urgently needed . we need to make sure we have capacity in the system to meet the challenge of providing all that additional childcare for families . i urge her to make sure that as much of that funding as possible is distributed , and to talk to local authorities about ensuring they do not top - slice it too aggressively . when the government announced the £ 8 and £ 11 rates for the younger years , we heard from childminders in particular that they simply did not believe that they would receive that . we want a system in which the providers on the frontline of providing childcare get the funding that the government announce . we have a rule at the moment that local authorities have to pass on 95 % of the funds that they receive , and our returns show that they pass on 97 % . however , as the years go on , with the amount of extra money that we have put into the system , we can definitely look at those figures and at what can be done . some of that will be set out in our consultation before the summer . the minister told us about several childcare providers that she has spoken to , but she has clearly not spoken to munchkins village nursery in burscough in my constituency . the nursery got in touch with me to say that , while the help for parents is very welcome , the government have by their own admission underfunded the sector to the tune of about one third of the funding promised — about £ 2 billion — and the nursery staff believe that the sector is in financial risk . does the minister appreciate that , regardless of any funding for parents , they simply can not find the childcare that they need ? i recognise that it has been a challenging few years for the sector . in this piece of work we have surveyed about 10,000 providers , we have a providers ’ finance report and we have surveyed about 6,000 parents , so we used a very data - driven estimate to come up with the figure . we will be consulting on the funding before the summer and , as i said , there will be funding coming in september before any expansion of the entitlements , which start in april next year . there will be additional money next year and by 2027 - 28 we will be spending an additional £ 4 billion that will be distributed via local authorities to those settings . i congratulate my hon . friend on such an excellent statement today — i think the shadow minister needs to read it , because he clearly did not listen to it . my hon . friend has clearly thought about the need for top - quality childcare , which for many young children is vital when their home life is perhaps not all it could be . one thing she has not talked much about is the provision of new workforce . can she comment a bit more on her consultation on changing the requirement for high - level qualifications to a requirement for qualifications that are more appropriate to providing empathetic and supportive care ? i know my right hon . friend is incredibly passionate about this area , and i share her passion . in the consultation we have set out some flexibilities after talking to the sector ; an example of that would be relaxing some of the requirements around having level 2 maths for level 3 qualifications , which we know has been a barrier for some people . we are looking at all kinds of flexibilities that mean we will get the right staff at every stage to make sure that our children get the right education . the minister would have been very welcome in the north of england , particularly in westmorland . this announcement is welcome in many ways and will help many parents in my constituency who can not afford to work at the moment . it is a good step forward . however , many childcare providers — probably the majority in my constituency — are linked to the primary school in that community , and primary schools have never faced such awful financial circumstances as they do now . i have visited many schools in westmorland the last few weeks , from appleby to windermere , from kendal to brough , from shap to witherslack and many others . they all tell me that the deserved pay rises for teachers and other staff are unfunded by government and that energy costs , which they have seen go through the roof , are also largely unfunded , leaving many schools in deficit and having to shed staff . all that undermines their ability to provide childcare and other forms of education . what has the minister to say to our local schools in westmorland , which are desperate for her support so that they can carry on providing education and childcare ? we are taking schools funding to a historic real - terms high . we are also making the single largest ever investment in childcare . i recognise that it has been a difficult time for public sector services , and the most important thing we can do is to grip inflation and make the pound go further , but overall we are putting record funding into both areas . we do need more childcare , and i wish the minister every success with these policies , but we are going to need a lot more people , businesses and other institutions to come forward to provide that care . will the whole government do more ? can we get rid of ir35 , a tax on the self - employed ? can we raise the value added tax threshold for small business ? we must look at making childcare more worthwhile , because we need the teachers and the childcarers . i thank my right hon . friend — i have just had a bit of a flashback to my days as a treasury parliamentary private secretary . he is absolutely right that the supply of childcare will be a really important part of growth , as has been reiterated by the imf and others . progress in this area is very welcome and necessary , but parts of the statement will be dispiriting for families in northern ireland , as we fall even further behind . can the minister confirm that northern ireland will receive commensurate funding through the barnett formula , and have she and her officials given any thought to how the new regulations and resources might be applied in northern ireland ? furthermore , given the extremely austere budget settlement in northern ireland , does she acknowledge that even where there are improvements in childcare , many children will be going on to increasingly degraded and under - resourced primary schools ? the money will be passed on in the normal way across the education budget . we regularly meet education ministers from the devolved administrations , and the secretary of state held such a meeting , i think from memory , in early june . an excellent statement — on behalf of nurseries in winchester and chandler ’s ford , i thank the minister . the recruitment drive in particular is much needed . however , it would be easier to do that , and to retain staff , if we could give staff a pay rise . the sector tells my all - party parliamentary group on childcare and early education — i thank the minister for coming to address us — that if it were not paying business rates , that would be a lot easier . school - based settings do not pay them , but the rest of the private , voluntary and independent sector does . i realise that that is a matter for treasury , but will she please take that away and look at it again ? that would make a her a true hero in the sector when she continues her very welcome visits . i will of course look at everything we can do to support all settings . as part of the work we did to assess costs , we looked at other costs , including things such as business rates , to assess the level of funding we should give for the hourly rates , but of course i will always look at anything i can do to support nurseries . looking at the existing childcare entitlements for two , three and four year olds , the early years alliance and the women ’s budget group estimate that the current offer falls short by about £ 1.8 billion — and that is even before we expand the offer , as was announced in the spring budget . the government are providing only an extra £ 204 million this year and £ 288 million next year , before we expand the hours . that clearly falls well short . there is no point expanding the hours if the providers are not there , so could the minister explain what she is doing to ensure that early years providers actually remain financially viable ? as i said , it has been a challenging time for providers , but the work we have done to come up with the hourly rate has been based on a lot of evidence . i do not recognise that figures that the hon . lady talks about . as i said , we surveyed 10,000 providers and 6,000 parents , and looked at providers ’ finance reports , to look deeply at the costs and come up with the hourly rate . i continue to talk to all providers as we continue the expansion . it is a tribute to the minister that she secured the single largest ever increase in funding in this important area and that the labour opposition could not even be bothered to turn up today . she will know at first hand from visiting imagination nursery , which is now an outstanding provider , that it has the sort of provision that we want to expand . for it to have the confidence to do so , it needs certainty on funding to recruit and retain staff and secure additional premises . will she keep pushing for as much advance clarity and certainty as possible so that all children can benefit from this wonderful announcement ? i absolutely will . it was a joy and a delight to visit imagination nursery , which does outstanding work , and i congratulate it on its recent grade . i will take my hon . friend ’s point on board . this is the first time in history that a prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer have put the early years at the centre of the country ’s growth strategy . i note that an international monetary fund analyst singled it out in saying that “ supply - side measures , notably the increase in childcare support … should have a positive effect on medium - term growth ” , so that is absolutely welcome . i can not thank the minister enough for visiting barbar nursery , allsorts , and curious caterpillars day nursery . in our work with onward , we have called for a national campaign on recruitment . if there is any possibility of that happening this year rather than next , i would like a commitment from the department that it will get a wriggle on , because that is important . will the minister work with the local government association to have a good look at what different councils are doing , not only with the money flowing down from government but on how often childminders are paid ? i know of childminders who are paid only about three times a year . not many of us could cope with that type of cashflow . as always , my hon . friend makes excellent points on this matter . i will absolutely consider her point about childminders and will ensure that i continue to talk to her . she has been incredibly helpful throughout this process and in securing the funding . i warmly welcome my hon . friend ’s statement , which will help some of those on the lowest incomes either to take up work or to take on more work . she will recall that when i had the pleasure of taking her to a nursey in didcot , it raised the varying rates that nurseries are paid by local authorities across the country for the same work . does she agree that , although the government ’s largest single investment in childcare ever is welcome , it is important that local authorities pay a broadly comparable amount of money to providers ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for taking to me to bright horizons in didcot , which was a useful visit . local authorities have different rates . we will set out funding rates before the summer , and will consult on them . we take different costs across the country into account , but he makes an interesting point . i warmly welcome the minister ’s announcement and thank her for all the work that she has done for childcare providers . i was going to raise the point made by my hon . friend at the moment , the way the policy works is that providers have to pass on at least 95 % , and can keep 5 % , of the funding rates that they are given . most pass on more — from our returns , most pass on 97%—but they can use the additional money for the administration of payments and such . may i congratulate my hon . friend on her statement and on the hard work she has put in to get us here ? i held a roundtable of early years providers in barrow a few weeks ago . the issue that came up time and again was that they are losing good staff — staff the kids like and the parents get on with — because of the qualifications requirements for english and maths . can the minister confirm whether part of the consultation will look at that ? may i invite her to come and visit cheeky monkeys childcare and some of the other providers in barrow at some point in the future ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . that was one of the things that i heard from the sector as well , particularly on the qualification barriers . i can confirm that we are consulting on that — particularly on the maths point — in the flexibilities consultation that we set out at the beginning of the summer . i would be delighted to visit him . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . in but 10 minutes time , we will move on to consideration of the holocaust memorial bill . it is very important in my view that the minister and the house should have available on the table the “ national memorial and learning centre : search for a central london site ” document issued by the uk holocaust memorial foundation in september 2015 . may i ask you to convey that to those on the treasury bench so that that document is available to ministers and the house ? i am grateful to the father of the house for his point of order and for giving me notice of it . i have paid careful attention to the point that he made . i can assure him that the vote office has printed from the internet and prepared copies of the document that he mentions . i entirely agree with him that it is important that the house be well educated on the facts of the matter that we are about to discuss , so i have myself obtained some copies . i will give one forthwith to the whip to give to the minister , and one to the labour whip to give to the shadow minister . i hope that the father of the house will thus be satisfied that the document that he considers very important is fully available . i do not have copies here for everyone , but they are available in the vote office . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . on “ no doubt there will be a statement to the house”—[official report , at that point . that is tomorrow . the families of the victims are desperate to know how such tragedies can be prevented in future . can you advise me on whether you have heard from the home office that an oral statement will be made to the house , and what more can be done to ensure that any measures announced as a result of the inquest receive proper parliamentary scrutiny so that no tragedy like the one we saw in plymouth can ever happen again ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his point of order . i can well understand his consternation . the matter to which he refers was truly a tragedy , and there are families who must be suffering dreadfully because of it . the only answer that i can give him from the chair is that i have no notice of the intention of any minister to make such a statement , but i am sure that those on the treasury bench will have heard what he has said , and i sincerely hope that his concerns will be conveyed to the appropriate minister . of course , i hardly need remind him that there are various mechanisms that he can use to raise this matter substantively on the floor of the house , and i am sure that he will go to the table office to see what he can do . motion for leave to bring in a bill ( i beg to move , that leave be given to bring in a bill to require the secretary of state to publish proposals for increasing the on - lending of uk special drawing rights via the imf , for transferring the capital returned to the uk by the european investment bank to the world bank , and for increasing the uk ’s support for the african development bank , for the purpose of reducing debt burdens and the cost of capital and contributing to the implementation of the paris agreement on climate change . i start by declaring an interest as chair of the international parliamentary network on the world bank and international monetary fund , which brings together 2,000 parliamentarians from 140 countries to argue for the changes that i will put before the government today . if anything , this bill is overdue . eight years ago , the world came together to agree an ambitious plan to spread freedom , security and justice to every corner of the planet . the sustainable development goals agreed in new york in september 2015 offered hope , progress and a better life to billions of people . months later , we came together again , not in new york but in paris , to agree the climate change agreement that would help us guarantee that there would be a planet left on which to make those goals a reality . however , the truth is that such ambitions are in deep trouble . there are just 10,000 days to go before the paris climate agreement deadline . a perfect storm is now threatening the world ’s potential to deliver on the goals that we agreed just eight years ago . in fact , seven giants now stand in the way of progress : want , hunger , disease , lost learning , conflict , debt and climate change . they are a cascading , connected set of challenges with lethal force . extreme poverty has risen for the first time this century , with 600 million people now forecast to be living on less than $ 2.15 a day by 2030 . globally , 200 million people now wake up without enough to eat , and 300 million children will need humanitarian assistance this year . on current trends , we will not meet our goal of ending hunger by 2030 . that scarcity is fuelling violence . about half of the world ’s extreme poor are expected to live in conflict - affected areas by 2030 . in turn , those conditions are threatening our ability to make good children ’s lost learning during covid , which could cost $ 21 trillion over the course of their lives . poorer nations have now exhausted their reserves . in fact , debt in developing countries is now the highest it has been for 50 years , and levels are rising . looming deadly over all of that are the changes in our climate and the chaos of extreme weather . across half the world and most of africa , the seasons are simply no longer predictable . the sun which once brought life now brings death because it burns so ferociously . the rains , when they fall , fall with such force that life - giving water floods and destroys the land it once nourished . against that murderous maelstrom , low and middle - income countries need to mobilise some $ 6 trillion between now and 2030 to hit their paris climate targets . poor countries did not cause climate change , but the world ’s poorest are somehow expected to pick up the pieces . we can not go on like this and , as president macron said in paris last week , we must not go on like this . if the world fails to act — if we fail to act — all of us may fall prey to those who preach that the rules - based order is not fit for purpose . new institutions outside the world bank , the imf , and perhaps even the united nations , will come forward beyond our influence , so we must change . that is why my bridgetown bill calls on the government to lead , to take the initiative and to help champion the agenda set out with such passion , force and eloquence by prime minister mia mottley . the whole house should salute her work . she has helped to galvanise the biggest shake - up of global development finance since the world bank and imf were created in 1944 . her bridgetown initiative is a pragmatic collection of ideas with radical implications for the world bank ’s mission and model , the resources deployed by the imf , and the goal that richer countries must step up to and meet . reforms are under way and the agenda is moving . i am grateful for the government ’s support , such as it is , but our best estimates are that the bretton woods institutions must at least triple the finance that they supply . that is why the uk should lead and help to champion this debate internationally . the bill is needed because it is a matter of regret that the once - proud record of our country — once lauded as a leader in global development — is now much reduced . it is a matter of regret that the prime minister found time to enjoy the company of mr murdoch in london last week and declined to join president macron in paris , with 50 other leaders from around the world . it is a matter of regret that the uk is not leading the debate on green development finance , but lagging behind . important steps forward were taken last week in paris . the world bank , under its brilliant new president , ajay banga , committed to an expanded crisis toolkit , replete with new types of insurance to backstop development projects , and crucially , to a pause in debt repayments so that countries can focus on what matters when crisis strikes without worrying about the bill . kristalina georgieva , the head of the imf , gave us some reassuring news about how we may now be on track to meet the target of sharing $ 100 billion in special drawing rights . however , there is still a gap in what needs to be accomplished , which is why the uk needs to rediscover the lost art of leading , and that is what this bill proposes . first , we should be increasing the on - lending of special drawing rights and following japan ’s lead . we have £ 19 billion - worth of new special drawing rights , and they are sitting there gathering dust in the exchange equalisation account . we have said that we will share 20 % , but japan said it will share 40 % . if we match that target , we could supply nearly £ 4 billion of extra resource to the poorest countries . i have been asking foreign secretaries and treasury secretaries for two years why we are not matching the ambition of countries such as japan and , frankly , i am yet to receive a good and coherent answer . secondly , we should be using some of those special drawing rights to support the work of the african development bank . if we lent £ 500 million - worth of special drawing rights , the adb could quadruple it in new concessional lending to countries across africa . thirdly , we should be helping to build a bigger world bank . the world bank remains the most efficient and effective way of mobilising development finance . a $ 20 billion increase in its capital base would unlock $ 200 billion in concessional lending over the course of the decade . if the uk contributed to that kind of increase , our share might be about $ 1 billion—$200 million a year over five years — but we could step up to that challenge . we will get £ 3.5 billion back from the european investment bank — i suppose some in this house would call that a brexit dividend — between now and 2030 . we should recycle that money into the world bank to help it radically expand lending to some of the world ’s poorest countries . nobody can be more eloquent in debates such as this than a hungry child , so let me conclude with the words of a 10 - year - old boy at a primary school in rural narok county , kenya . i had the privilege of meeting him at his school with “ i like coming to school because i have many friends who i play with and learn together . my teachers always teach us how to read , write and many other new things . they are good to us . ” but he also says : “ sometimes we eat once in a day because there is no food and we do n’t have enough water to drink . despite all these challenges we still come to school to learn . ” the children of that school have the same dreams as our children . they want to be lawyers , doctors and teachers , and some — so help them — want to be politicians . yet such is the drought , such is the poverty , and such is the desperation that many families struggle to survive . girls as young as 11 are sent to get married , and boys are sent to work even younger . children are not in school because they are hunting for water all day . if we do not step up and solve these challenges , there will be not just an opportunity gap for those children , but an opportunity cost for all of us . that is a price we can not afford , so i call on his majesty ’s government to act . question put and agreed to . ordered , that liam byrne , sarah champion , sir stephen timms , tony lloyd , sir george howarth , clive efford , debbie abrahams , mr virendra sharma , mike amesbury and patrick grady present the bill . liam byrne accordingly presented the bill . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on second reading the reasoned amendment in the name of sir peter bottomley has been selected . i beg to move , that the bill be now read a second time . this short bill serves a vital purpose . it ensures that the undertaking that this government have given , supported by the official opposition and all parties in this house , is honoured , and that a fitting , government - led national memorial and learning centre to honour the 6 million who died in the holocaust is established in a suitable , prominent centre at the heart of our capital city . i know that everyone in this house recognises that the holocaust was a unique evil . genocide — the greatest crime that humanity can inflict on other human beings — has been a dark feature of our shared history since the dawn of time , but the holocaust stands out in scale and in horror . it was a unique desire on the part of a nation to wipe out an entire people . mechanised cruelty executed on a scale that could never have been imagined beforehand meant that , from the pyrenees to the urals , the nazi war machine was bent on the elimination of an entire race . i think all of us , whatever our views on the bill and all of the inevitable details that follow in making sure that an appropriate memorial is sited , will share a desire to ensure that the commitment “ never again ” is in all our hearts . i fully concur with what my right hon . friend has just said , and i am fully supportive of a national holocaust memorial , but the reason i will not be supporting the government in the passing of this bill this evening — if it is passed — is that there appears to have been a complete lack of public consultation . westminster city council was against it , and it seems to me as though this has been imposed from above by government . that is not what we do in this country : we need a much wider consultation . that is why many prominent jews , including malcolm rifkind , former rabbis and so forth , have signed the open letter arguing against the siting of the memorial in victoria tower gardens . my hon . friend makes an important point . there has been controversy and there has been opposition to the site of the memorial , but it is only fair to say that the decision to site it in victoria tower gardens has followed consultation . there was extensive consultation on this project , starting with prime minister david cameron ’s holocaust commission in 2014 , which received almost 2,500 responses . following the announcement in january 2016 that victoria tower gardens had been identified as the most fitting site , an international design competition was then held to select a suitable design team . i do not put this as a point of argument , but as something that i hope my right hon . friend is aware of : when the uk holocaust memorial foundation put out its specification in september 2015 — a copy of which , i think , is available to my right hon . friend — it said that it wanted various criteria to be taken into account , including a possible location in central london , which on page 10 of the specification is illustrated as west of regent ’s park , east of spitalfields and down from the imperial war museum . in the four or five months between september 2015 and january 2016 , there was no public consultation about the site at all . i do not want my right hon . friend to feel that he needs to answer that point now , but if he could say before the end of the debate what consultation there was between september 2015 and january 2016 , that might be helpful to the house . the consultation was undertaken after the announcement of the winning design , and from january to september 2017 the public were invited to comment on the shortlisted designs , which were exhibited in parliament and across the united kingdom . of course , as the father of the house will know , there was a planning inquiry , and during that inquiry extensive material about the memorial and the learning centre was published and shared . interested parties were given an opportunity to raise concerns and objections , and objectors had the opportunity to make their case to the independent planning inspector at that point . however , i stress that the decision on the site was not taken by government ministers , and — in respect of the understandable concerns raised by my hon . friend i am extremely grateful to the secretary of state for giving way . on the location , what assurances can he give that the bill does not undermine the environmental protections that victoria tower gardens currently enjoy ? victoria tower gardens will continue to be a park with public access — only some 7.5 % of the location of the park will be occupied by the memorial . of course , when david cameron initiated the commission , it was made clear that any memorial should be suitably striking , suitably prominent , and in a location that has political , cultural , emotional and historical resonance , which it will be . when i was leader of the house of commons , between 2017 and 2019 , i received so many representations personally from people who made the case that there are now so few holocaust survivors still living that we simply have to get on with this . as my right hon . friend said , that consultation began under david cameron ’s leadership , which is now a long time in the past . if we are going to do this , and it needs to be in a prominent place to show our respect and commitment to remembering that horrific time , we must get on with it . i am very grateful to my right hon . friend , who was a brilliant leader of the house , for making that point so clearly . as she reminds us , the holocaust is moving from living history to history . the voices of those who are survivors and witnesses are fading , and we must ensure that their example endures . just a fortnight ago , ben helfgott , an ambassador for the holocaust educational trust , sadly passed away . ben was a holocaust survivor who went on to represent this country in weightlifting at the olympics . thanks to the holocaust educational trust , i had the privilege of meeting ben and hearing his testimony . i do not think any of us who have heard the testimony of any of the witnesses and survivors for whom the holocaust educational trust has provided a platform will forget that — there is nothing as powerful as hearing from those who lived through and survived the hell of the holocaust . as ben and other survivors pass on , it is our duty and our responsibility to move as quickly as we can to ensure that the memorial they fought for and wished to see is established suitably . of course , one of the other reasons why it is so important that we move quickly and show resolution is that not only are voices fading , but antisemitism is rising . in 2022 , the last year for which we have figures , the community security trust recorded 1,652 antisemitic incidents . in the year before that , the number of antisemitic incidents in this country had reached a record high . as jonathan sacks reminded us , antisemitism is a virus that mutates . we need to be vigilant , always and everywhere , against hate and prejudice , and the memorial and learning centre will establish a means of doing so for generations to come . i agree with everything that the secretary of state has just said . he will be aware that the jewish museum in camden is due to close because of a lack of funds — that is my understanding . what consideration have the government given to providing some funds to keep that recognition of the holocaust alive ? the hon . gentleman makes an important point . of course , the government stand behind the memorial , but there will also be philanthropic funding . here again , gerald ronson cbe is one of the figures at the forefront in supporting this cause , as he has so many good causes . the government also support the work of the holocaust educational trust . indeed , i was proud as the education secretary to carry on the great work of ed balls in making sure that holocaust education was a critical part of the history that every child learns in our schools . as the former leader of the house , my right hon . friend this bill seeks specifically to change the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 , which governs public parks . all we seek to do is to make sure that those parts of the 1900 act that mrs justice thornton rightly invoked in the case that was heard before her are altered . we wish to ensure that it is the clear will of parliament — both the commons and the lords , across parties and across political traditions — that the memorial goes ahead , while also continuing to respect free access to victoria tower gardens , respecting its position as a public park , and making sure that those green spaces are accessible to all and that the existing memorials there are respected as well . as i have mentioned , the choice of venue has attracted some controversy , but i can put it no better than the chief rabbi himself . when questioned about why , he said that this “ is an inspirational choice of venue … this is a most wonderful location because it is in a prime place of great prominence and it is at the heart of our democracy … we do n’t want to tuck the holocaust away somewhere — similar to … a tiny monument in hyde park , that most people have never heard of . we want all of british society to be aware … for the sake of the whole country and its future . ” we are all privileged to be parliamentarians , and we all know that when people think of this country , the symbol they associate with it is this house . we all know that this nation — the mother of parliaments , the home of parliamentary democracy — has a proud tradition . it is only appropriate that , when we reflect on the greatest evil that humanity has ever been responsible for , it is here in the home of parliamentary democracy that we find the space , the time and the common endeavour to make sure that a fitting memorial can be established , and that is what this bill seeks to do . my right hon . friend is making a very effective and powerful speech in support of the bill . the point he has just made about the proximity of the memorial and learning centre to this institution is exactly right . does he agree with me that , when we talk about the holocaust and the horrors of the past , it is not just something that happened to other people over there ; it is actually part of our story and our history as well ? so westminster , close to parliament , is the ideal location for this memorial . i could not agree more . there are representatives in this house and in the other place who are the relatives of those who died or survived the holocaust . lord austin , a distinguished cross bencher in the other place , is the adopted son of a holocaust survivor . this is about recognising the intimate links between this country and that crime , and the fact that distinguished figures such as those responsible for the kindertransport played an heroic role in helping people fleeing persecution to come to this country . however , it is also the case that all history is complex , and there are mistakes that this nation and some of its leaders or leading politicians made at that time that we also need to remember , if we are to ensure that “ never again ” is a phrase that resonates with meaning rather than being simply an empty repeated platitude . my interest in this bill is primarily driven by constituents of mine who are related to thomas fowell buxton , and there is a very important monument to his memory and the campaign he waged against slavery on this site . if this bill proceeds , what can we do to ensure that this memorial complements that memorial ? again , the hon . gentleman makes a very important point . the whole design by david adjaye and his team is designed to complement the buxton memorial . indeed , the hon . gentleman is quite right that it is fitting that a memorial intended to ensure that we remember those who fought against the evil of slavery is located alongside a memorial to ensure that we remember the victims of the greatest crime that humanity was ever responsible for . my right hon . friend has been right in talking about the site for the memorial , and colleagues have raised the issue of opposition to it . does he agree with me that the principal reason why some jewish people and jewish leaders are raising objections is the sheer length of time this whole process is taking ? actually , they do not object to where it is sited , but just want to make sure we get on with the job and get it done . my hon . friend is absolutely right . from the meetings i have had with the commission and the conversations i have had with people in the jewish community and beyond , i know they want us to proceed . they understand that we are a country governed by laws and they understand why the court came to the decision it did on the 1900 act , but they also want the government , as well as this house and the other place , to proceed at the fastest possible pace — giving due consideration to all the arguments that are and have been made , but at the fastest possible pace — to ensure that an appropriate memorial is established . i would like to close by reflecting on the words of mala tribich mbe , who is now 92 years old , and a holocaust survivor herself . as she says : “ as the holocaust moves further into history and we survivors become less able to share our testimonies this memorial and learning centre will be a lasting legacy so that future generations will understand why it is important for people to remember the holocaust , to learn from the past and stand up against injustice . the memory of the holocaust can not be left to fade when us eyewitnesses are no longer able to share our memories . ” i believe we owe it to mala and to all survivors to pass this bill , and i commend it to the house . i call the shadow secretary of state . i want to start by saying that labour strongly supports this bill and welcomes the second reading of it today . we agree very much with the sentiment expressed by conservative members that the sooner and more swiftly we are able to make progress with this , the better . the movement to create a fitting national memorial to mark , to remember and , most of all , to learn from the horrors of the holocaust is something that rightly commands the support of members on all sides of the house . so we welcome the second reading of the bill and its , i hope , swift progress through the house . the holocaust is undeniably the greatest crime of the last century . people were taken from their homes , stripped of their possessions and subjected to the horror of the concentration camps , forced labour camps and ghettos just , in many cases , because they were jewish . the murder of 6 million jews and so many others by the nazis must never ever be forgotten . i was in my early 20s when i first visited auschwitz , and it is something i will never forget . i knew it would make an impression , but i do not think i had any real comprehension of what a deep and lasting impression it would leave on me to this very day . history lives in that camp , and we can feel the pain in the air . it is a very difficult thing to comprehend , but it is a privilege to be able to learn and to understand about the horrors of the past in order to ensure that it never happens again . for my generation , whose grandparents lived through and , in my grandfather ’s case , fought in the war and fought for the establishment of the state of israel as somewhere where jewish people could find a natural home and where they were safe — where they would always be safe — this is not just history . we have grown up with the stories of what happened in that era , and of why it matters so much that we remember . however , it has actually been through the work of those incredible charities and museums , and those who support them — they provide the chance to hear from those who survived and , through them , the stories of those who did not — that we have been able to understand the true horror of what human beings are capable of . given the experience of my predecessor in this place , who was targeted due to her allyship with the jewish community , does my hon . friend agree that this memorial and education centre is more important than ever before in telling the truths of the holocaust , and in remembering the 6 million lives lost to it , so that we learn those lessons and people never have to go through that kind of thing again ? i am grateful to my hon . friend . like me , she will have had the experience of going into schools and colleges in our constituencies , and had the privilege of meeting survivors of the holocaust , and watching the faces of young people as comprehension dawns of the true horror of what happened , with resolve forming in them that never again should that be allowed to happen . the power of that can not be overestimated , and i am grateful to my hon . friend for adding her voice and support to the bill . does my hon . friend agree with the secretary of state , as i do wholeheartedly , about the importance of the positioning of this memorial , and of it being right next to the mother of all democracies , with the symbolism that that provides ? i agree wholeheartedly with my hon . friend . there are many , many lessons to learn from the darkest era of our recent history , but one of those lessons must surely be the importance of political courage and political leadership . those of us on the opposition benches know how important that is , and that no institution is immune from the scourge of antisemitism . one of the reasons why i raced back from manchester this morning , where i had been at a conference debating housing , was in order to be here today to say loudly and clearly on behalf of the official opposition how strongly we support what the secretary of state and his colleagues are doing . my hon . friend mentioned manchester , and as the mp for bury south i am proud to represent many holocaust survivors , and i have been fortunate enough to meet them and share their stories . an institution and a museum , and more importantly an educational facility such as this , is intrinsic to us not only learning those lessons , but to making sure such things are never repeated . does my hon . friend agree that the best thing we can do to honour their memories and have a legacy for them while they are still alive , is to get this project going as quickly as possible , and ultimately to get it built and used ? absolutely . as a former student of holy cross college in bury , i have met many of my hon . friend ’s constituents over the years . i know how important it is to them that they hand on the baton to the next generation , and that we do not allow this to be the moment when understanding and comprehension of what happened in that darkest moment of history is lost . they can then hand over that baton , and feel reassured that the future is safe in our hands and with future generations . i thank my hon . friend for the work he has done in standing up for his community over and over again in this place . it is noticed in bury , and it is noticed here . with the march of time and the continued loss of survivors , the holocaust is moving from being part of lived experience to being part of history . as we begin to approach that moment , our generation should commit to teaching the next about the horrors in our past , and the lessons for the future . that is what this new , purpose built memorial in the heart of london is . it is a commitment to arm future generations against the horrors of the past , so that when we say “ never again ” , they can be sure we mean it . that is why labour stands squarely behind the holocaust educational trust , the holocaust memorial day trust and the board of deputies . we pay tribute to their work , and to the two co - chairs , lord eric pickles and the right honourable ed balls , who have shown that this is not , and should never be , an issue that divides us . as karen pollock , the inimitable chief executive of the holocaust educational trust , said yesterday : “ it is crucial to remember that the holocaust memorial — and remembering the holocaust in general — is not about planning permission , or square footage , or underground pipes . what these discussions are about at their heart , is people . people who were subjected to unimaginable suffering , simply because they were jewish . ” like many others , she has reminded me that none of us should ever make the mistake of thinking that this is history . antisemitism did not die at the end of the holocaust . around the world , jewish communities have been targeted by terrorists in germany , france , belgium and many other countries . last year , anti - jewish hate hit a record high in the united kingdom , with abuse , threats and violent assaults levelled at jewish children , women and men on the streets of britain . the jewish leadership council and the community security trust are powerful advocates for their community . they have reminded me so often of the human cost of this , often with heartbreaking stories about the impact on their own families and children — children who go to school behind locked gates ; security guards at the doors of synagogues . it shames our nation . this group accounts for less than 1 % of the total religious population in the uk , but antisemitic hate crimes account for a staggering 23 % of all religious hate crimes . it is completely unacceptable in a modern society where the experiences of the past are still so raw that that is happening every day in our communities , on our campuses and in our workplaces . we on the labour benches know that only too well and we are determined to tackle it . from what she has chronicled , my hon . friend reminds us how easy it is for history to be forgotten but , were it not forgotten , these incidents would not occur . that makes the creation of this memorial doubly important . does she also agree that the argument about the location has just got to stop ? the location that has been chosen puts the memorial in the centre of london where it will be visible and accessible to the largest number of people . that is what we want . we want as many people as possible to see something that will ensure they do not forget . arguing about the location does a disservice to the memory of the 6 million jews who were killed in the holocaust . as ever , my right hon . friend speaks incredibly powerfully . i do not doubt the sincerity of those who have taken part in the debate on the location , but that debate has run for long enough . labour members share the government ’s view that it is now time to move forwards with a memorial that is incredibly important to every single person in our country , but holds particular significance for our jewish community here in the united kingdom . i personally am not convinced by the location , but want the memorial to go ahead . if it is to go ahead , surely it must do so speedily — that is the point the hon . lady is making . if second reading is passed this evening , motion no.8 on the order paper is about paying a select committee chair to come and do a job . that is normally done — it happened with high - speed 2 — when something is going to take a long time . it is not about meetings in one or two committees . when the hon . lady talks about speed , what is she talking about and why are we paying someone ? that indicates to me that this is going to be a long process . i thank the hon . member for that intervention . as i said , i do not doubt the sincerity of those who have raised concerns about the location , including the father of the house . it is right and legitimate that we should have a debate about that , and it is right , fair and proper that they should make their concerns known . labour members believe that this is the right location and that it is important that we do not delay any further . we believe that it is important that the hybrid process is followed ; that is the process set out for the path of the bill . we can not make that process any quicker , but we can remove any unnecessary obstacles and delay . we know that that is the government ’s intention and we will support them in that . as i said a moment ago to my right hon . friend there are many people in the other place who have worked on this matter . the secretary of state mentioned lord austin , but i also think of lord dubs , who came to this country on the kindertransport , has been a powerful advocate for child refugees and is someone we admire greatly . it pays tribute to the work they have done over many , many years that this house is speaking with one voice , on all sides of the house , to try to move forward . the speakers from the front bench have so far been generous in giving way . i appreciate what the hon . lady said about the sincerity of those who are concerned about the location . we in our family have jewish blood , and i do not think there is any doubt about the sincerity of all views on this . would she acknowledge that , while we all agree there needs to be a national holocaust memorial , a lot of people within the jewish community oppose the siting of the memorial that the bill will install , if there is a vote and it passes ? that should be acknowledged . they include people such as maureen lipman , malcolm rifkind , former rabbis , jonathan romain , sir richard evans and several holocaust survivors . i am more than happy to acknowledge that and to restate the commitment that we on the labour benches do not doubt the sincerity of those engaging in this debate . we acknowledge the strength of feeling and the different views that exist within the jewish community and across the country , as well as in this place and on the government benches in particular . the hybrid process provides an opportunity for those concerns to be expressed and for those debates to be had . i would say to the hon . gentleman that , having worked with the jewish community in this country and leaders of major jewish organisations for a long time , i am left in no doubt about the strength of feeling among many members and leaders of the jewish community that they support the location at this venue and that they want to see it proceed at the heart of democracy , where it matters most that we remember the past in order to shape the future . we believe that the symbolic siting of the memorial next to this house is a demonstration that the british government , the official opposition , our parliament and our nation are committed to remembering the horrors of the past and ensuring that we do not repeat them . this memorial is a vital step on that path and labour is pleased to support the bill today . i beg to move an amendment , to leave out from “ that ” to the end of the question and add : “ this house , while accepting the value of a national holocaust memorial , declines to give a second reading to the holocaust memorial bill because no adequate reason has been given for seeking to build the memorial and learning centre in a long - established small public park , thereby contradicting the government ’s own policies on environmental and green space protection ; because the government has not implemented its 2015 promise to establish an endowment fund for holocaust education , which would have spread the benefits of the learning centre around the country ; because the proposed site is opposed by many in the jewish community , including many holocaust survivors ; because there was no public consultation on the choice of site ; and because there has been no consideration of alternatives to victoria tower gardens since the criteria declared in september 2015 were set aside . ” i am grateful to the opposition spokesman , i meant to start my remarks by saying that , within months of my birth in july 1944 , and besides my father getting rather badly injured in normandy , later that year , margot and anne frank caught typhus in bergen - belsen . they died early in 1945 . in april 1945 , my father ’s cousin — my first cousin once removed — dr george woodwark was one of the westminster medical students who went to bergen - belsen to try to save as many lives as they could . they did valiant work in appalling conditions . when i heard directly from george what it was like , i was as moved as i was when i first read reports of the concentration camps , the death camps and the treatment of jews . that feeling is only reinforced when i go to the imperial war museum ’s holocaust galleries . if anyone has not done so , i commend them doing so . one only need go there , or look at the online material on the education side , to be reminded that the purpose is , as set out by the uk holocaust memorial foundation , that we should know what was happening when those who survived are no longer with us . there was no intention in the holocaust commission report to the government and there was no intention with the uk holocaust memorial foundation in september 2015 that the memorial had to be up before holocaust survivors had died . that is a later creation and justification , and some regard it as pretty weak . i think it was i have a home here , so people can say i have a vested interest . i have also got a vested interest in having proper education about the holocaust . since this process started , one of my cousins has established what we knew vaguely , which is that more than 100 of my grandfather ’s cousins died during the holocaust . i do not regard myself as jewish — i regard myself as christian — but i am proud to be associated with what they went through , which i know is possibly still happening now around the world , whether that is in sudan , rwanda , burundi , cambodia or srebrenica . we are not going to stop holocausts by where our memorial is . it is right that we should have one , but the education side matters . the holocaust commission recommended , and the then prime minister accepted , that there should be an endowment fund for education . in the years since , that has not happened . we then go to the government ’s commitment that , if the voluntary side can raise £ 25 million , they will put in £ 50 million . the government have now raised that to £ 75 million . the majority of the money should be spent on education , as set down by the uk holocaust memorial foundation . that has not happened . the principle of this bill — here i disagree with the government — is not clause 2 as well as clause 1 , but clause 1 ; it is regularising future payments . the earlier payments , which amount to well over £ 17 million so far , have been paid under common law . it is right and necessary that there should now be legislative authority for the government to spend more and that is why i do not oppose clause 1 . if we go to clause 2 , we come to the reasons that i tabled my reasoned amendment . i should say to the front benchers that i do not propose to push my reasoned amendment to a vote . a reasoned amendment , to be acceptable for the order paper , needs in effect to kill the bill , and i am not trying to kill clause 1 . i am grateful to my hon . friend page 10 of the uk holocaust memorial foundation ’s proposal for a memorial and learning centre illustrates the acceptable area of central london . it goes from the west of regent ’s park to spitalfields in the east and down to victoria tower gardens . i interrupt my flow to say that the inspector , who took over consideration of the planning application by the secretary of state — this is a planning application by a secretary of state , albeit one of the previous secretaries of state — said that he would not be able to consider the imperial war museum ’s proposals because they were not detailed . i do not think i am giving away any secrets in saying that the imperial war museum was told not to provide detailed proposals to the government ’s call for where the site should be and what should be there . the government are responsible for allowing the inspector to come to that perverse decision that alternatives should not be considered . the government , through their foundation — for the foundation is an arm of government — said , “ where should it be ? ” fifty places were put forward and one person — albeit the then chairman of the conservative party — wrote to a conservative minister to say , “ have you thought about victoria tower gardens ? perhaps the learning centre could be at millbank . ” the government later decided that they would put the learning centre and memorial together in this very small royal park , thereby wrecking it . i say this , through you madam deputy speaker , to the secretary of state and to the country . if the government continue with their proposals , they know that there will be a four - year construction programme after permission eventually gets through the houses of parliament and the secretary of state ’s junior minister — i will say his colleague minister , to put it politely — makes a decision , independently of the secretary of state as the applicant . that will take , say , another nine months in parliament . we are talking five years from now , so that takes us to at least 2028 — people talk about 2027 , but that is unrealistic — for a proposal made in september 2015 . if it is important that holocaust survivors can be there for the memorial ’s opening , we should not be continuing with this process . indeed , it is not the one that we should have started with . i make this proposal to the secretary of state and the government : why not have a competition for an alternative memorial by itself ? the learning centre can come later ; survivors do not need to be waiting for the learning centre . it should be a proper memorial — preferably not the one rejected in ottawa , which is essentially what we have adopted ; although the fins may have changed slightly , it has the same number of fins and the same interpretation — that could be put up in whitehall , in parliament square or on college green across the road from parliament . then , once the education centre at the north end of victoria tower gardens is gone , it can be placed there . we know that space in victoria tower gardens will be needed for the restoration and renewal of the palace of westminster — i doubt that parliament square will be used for that — and we know that memorials can be moved , because the buxton memorial was moved from parliament square to victoria tower gardens . we could have a competition for a memorial to be created for less than £ 20 million and to be erected within two years . we could have the opening ceremony with holocaust survivors there , and then later the memorial could be moved to wherever people chose . that would not be a rush , but it would be three years faster than the current proposal . the government are stuck on a course that any sensible person could have diverted them from at any stage . i invite the secretary of state to ask the uk holocaust memorial foundation to have a roundtable with him , me , baroness deech , holocaust survivors and others who are interested from the local community — including the thorney island society , of which i am a member , and london parks & gardens — so that rather than shout at each other in public , we discuss the issues together . suppose that we set the object of establishing , at reasonable cost , a memorial that would open within two years as an alternative to this process ? i am not saying that we should stop the process straightaway ; they could run in parallel and then we could have the option between my proposal and what the government appear to be committed to . i commend the house of commons library ’s good briefing on this saga . it is pretty comprehensive , although in my view it does not give quite enough attention to the september 2015 specifications . let us remember what they were . one was that the local authority would approve the plan . westminster city council was not going to do so , and that is why a former secretary of state took the decision away from the council . there was consultation with local people , who overwhelmingly and rationally argued against putting the memorial in victoria tower gardens , and especially having this tank of a learning centre associated with it . after that , either the uk holocaust memorial foundation or the government — i can not remember which — got a firm to go and stand outside asking , “ would you like to have a holocaust memorial ? ” a load people put a tick , as many people in the establishment have to this proposal . it was not argued . my hon . friend to those who think the way i do , in whole or in part , i commend not voting against second reading , but not voting for it . that will show that the government have not been able to establish large numbers of people in support of it . we will have a separate debate on the instruction , and i will invite colleagues to vote with me on that . when we come to it , i will argue more about the hybridity . i am probably the only person in the chamber who was present when michael heseltine conducted the labour back benchers as they sang “ the red flag ” . something peculiar had happened in the votes on the hybridity of the aircraft and shipbuilding industries bill , which had been classified by the speaker as hybrid . the then labour government put down a motion disregarding that . there was a draw on the first vote , so the speaker left things the way they were . on the second vote , when the speaker would have pushed things backwards had there been a draw , the then government managed to create one more vote in their favour , which led to a degree of uproar . speaker george thomas — viscount tonypandy — dealt with that quite effectively when it came back to the chair , then suspended the house and let the apologies come the following day . that hybridity issue caused embarrassment to the government . this one does too . when the hybridity was announced , the government claimed that they were pleased , but they had spent all their time in the weeks before arguing against it being hybrid . it is hybrid because it affects other people ’s interests . when it comes to the instruction , i will go into more detail , but now i want to say , in friendship to my right hon . friend the secretary of state , that he should try the alternative process in parallel . in private or in public , he should say that if we now want the memorial very close to westminster , which “ we”—i say that in quotation marks — did not in september 2015 , and if we want it open before the last holocaust survivors die , that will not happen in the next five years under the present plans . he should think of an alternative , and compare the merits of both . i will now announce the result of today ’s deferred division on the relationships and sexuality education ( northern ireland ) ( amendment ) regulations 2023 . the ayes were 373 and the noes were 28 , so the ayes have it . [ the division list is published at the end of today ’s debates . ] i am pleased to speak in this debate to put on the record my party ’s firm commitment to ensuring that the holocaust and subsequent genocides are not forgotten . we must take steps to actively remember . because of that , part of the memorial needs to be focused on learning . the particular memorial that the bill deals with is to be situated in london . i do not have a strong view about where it should be in london , but i have no objection to the government ’s proposal , given that i represent east renfrewshire — a constituency hundreds of miles away in a different country altogether . it is reasonable that i look to those who are closer . i appreciate the range of views that have been expressed , but the thread that runs through this debate is one that we all take an interest in , regardless of our own geographies and the range of views on the detail . we all support the principle of taking practical steps to ensure that holocaust remembrance is made possible . i am sure that none of us thinks differently . that matters . the truth is that we need to reflect . we need to think about how to make sure that the cold reality of what happened is not lost or diluted as time passes . the remaining survivors are fewer and fewer with every year that passes . that in itself means that we need to take practical steps to ensure that history is preserved and remembered . the hon . lady is giving a powerful speech about something that is not just practically and politically important , but emotionally important . i believe there is a great emotional need in this country to do something to recognise the suffering of the holocaust on behalf of those citizens of this country who are survivors of it . does she agree that we could argue forever about location , but we have a location , we have a plan and what is important is that it now goes ahead as quickly as possible ? i thank the hon . lady for that intervention . i agree with every word she said . she is spot - on when she talks about the emotional , human side of this issue . we are talking about human history — a history of individuals , families and friends — not about some unfathomable number of people who were murdered by the nazis because of their identity . it is about how we protect and preserve these individual histories , even when the people who could give first - hand testimony are no longer with us . i have heard the different views . we must respect those and still find a way for everyone to move forward . the chief rabbi has spoken about the worry that holocaust survivors have expressed to him , describing the panic in their voices as they say that they fear the world will forget in the course of time . karen pollock , chief executive of the holocaust educational trust , has said that time is running out ; survivors will not be with us forever , and many who dreamed of taking their family to the memorial have , unfortunately , passed away . she said that those who are still with us hope to see the day that the memorial is complete , and pointed out that it is important to the liberators as well . she and the chief rabbi make very strong points . the holocaust memorial commission was asked what needed to be done to preserve the memory of the holocaust , and obviously a significant conversation went on , but that was nearly 10 years ago , and here we are in some kind of limbo while the arguments continue and the positions probably become more entrenched , because that is the nature of these things . as i said , i do not have an especially strong view on where a memorial should be located , but i do have a very strong view that we should not still be in a holding pattern nearly 10 years on . we need to make progress . we need to move things along and make sure that in doing so , we take into account the views of survivors and the jewish community . i was pleased to hear we need to make sure that the voices of those who survived are accessible . i have seen at first hand the profound impact that hearing from survivors , henry and the late ingrid wuga , had on children in my constituency . the holocaust is certainly not the vague memory of some moment in history in the community where i live ; it is part of the living memory of many families . i can well understand why people correctly have a very strong view that we need to preserve the testimonies . a holocaust memorial could be a powerful tool for doing that . it needs to be able to make history come to life , so that we can understand better . i was fortunate to be able to visit yad vashem a number of years ago . like when i was looking at the yad vashem website earlier today , i noticed that on this day — that is why we need to get on with the memorial . these details — these threads of history — cannot be lost . this must go hand in hand with other initiatives that are already doing powerful work , such as the lessons from auschwitz project , which has had such an impact on schools in my area , as have vision schools scotland and the excellent gathering the voices programme — which does exactly that , capturing the voices of those who survived . all those have a place in the fabric of how we remember , and the memorial can play a vital part in that as well . i think that in scotland it would be welcomed as one of a range of ways of ensuring that this information is accessible to people . i hope that the memorial will remember jane haining , a scottish schoolmistress of whom i have spoken often here , who died at auschwitz after refusing to leave the jewish children in her care . she has been named as righteous among the nations at yad vashem , and will also be memorialised by the installation of a stolpersteine in edinburgh , thanks to an initiative from angus robertson msp , the scottish government ’s cabinet secretary for constitution , external affairs and culture . that story of jane haining — standing up for others because she knew that what was happening was wrong — could not be more resonant today . for us to know that the construction of a holocaust memorial is under way while atrocities continue in too many places across the world — as the holocaust educational trust pointed out in its excellent briefing for today ’s debate , this kind of facility also allows us to better confront the contemporary rise of antisemitism . i think it important that we acknowledge the rising tide of extremist views , including holocaust denial . the community security trust found last year that antisemitic incidents had reached a record high , with a 49 % increase in such incidents in the first six months of 2021 . let us be clear : the climate is increasingly intolerant and hateful . sickening and public displays of antisemitism are increasing both in the uk and overseas . nowhere is immune , and we now also have to deal with the amplification of holocaust denial and distortion , conspiracy and misinformation in the online space . to deal with that , the most powerful tool in our arsenal is education , which is why the learning element of the memorial matters so much . the facts of what happened could not be more resonant in the here and now . i hope that we can agree to proceed with the plan today . the first holocaust survivor whom i met , as an 18 - year - old working in a kibbutz in israel , was lena . she spoke as much english as i spoke yiddish , but we got through it together . she was an amazing woman to work with and for . i will always be grateful for the support and friendship that she gave me , an 18 - year - old away from home for the first time . for me , that was a lesson in human spirit and human survival . we are fortunate in this country to have many holocaust survivors who are still willing to share their stories . sadly , however , this living testimony will not be with us forever , and their stories show us why the memorial is so important . critically , today ’s debate is not about whether we should have a memorial — that , i think , is something on which we all agree — but about whether the right location is victoria tower gardens , and , therefore , whether the bill is necessary . as we have heard , the bill would amend the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 , which preserves the park for the public , and repeal the prohibition on building in the park . that would permit the building of the holocaust memorial and learning centre . the centre is not just a simple monument ; it would require excavations going down two storeys to fulfil a design that has come under heavy criticism on account of its scale and suitability for the area . naturally , that has caused concern for many of my residents in the surrounding area and so , as the local mp for the proposed site , i stand in support of the save victoria tower gardens campaign . the campaign is a group of local people who care deeply about this area . they have worked with a variety of groups , such as historic england , the thorney island society , the buxton family , london historic parks and gardens trust and , most importantly , holocaust survivors , to make sure that we get the project right . after consulting those interest groups , the campaign has raised several concerns about the project , which come back to one major issue : location . location is a key consideration for every development , and it is no different in westminster . there is a shortage of community parks in the city of westminster , so the loss of even the smallest open space can have a big impact on the community . in central london , such losses are felt even more keenly . i appreciate the concerns of the local community about their amenities , but in the suggested location , the holocaust memorial would offer more than just education and a reminder to the public . does the hon . lady agree that it would also offer a reminder to those of us in this place for generations to come about the danger of allowing a repeat and allowing racism — antisemitism — to grow ? that is why the location , although i accept it is not ideal for everyone , is important . i agree that we must remember the holocaust — all holocausts , across the 20th and 21st centuries ; sadly , they continue today — but this is about the location . as the local mp , and having been leader of westminster city council during the planning process — believe me , i saw it all , from start to finish — i know that the local people have no problem with the memorial ; it is about the location . as i said , the concern is about the shortage of community parks in the city of westminster . the park ’s loss will be felt . it is important to outline what an important neighbourhood park victoria tower gardens is for thousands of local people , and not just those in expensive houses and neighbourhoods . let us not forget that yards from this place and victoria tower gardens , thousands of people live in housing association and council homes . they do not have the benefit of gardens . every single green space is precious for them . i have spoken to people living on those estates and they fear that losing their local park will mean their children can not play . going for a walk or for lunch , or doing a media interview , is one thing , but losing a family park is another thing completely . there were more than 1,000 objections to the original planning application for the memorial , mostly on the grounds of loss of green space . i remember that time , and those were genuine concerns from local people . the save victoria tower gardens campaign also noted the site ’s important legal functions and its role in protecting the palace of westminster world heritage site . that is an important point . we must remember that victoria tower gardens is a grade ii listed public park . for this reason , the design of the monument and learning centre matters greatly . historic england , the government ’s adviser on historic environment , has raised significant concerns about overwhelming the existing monuments . the gardens have notable existing memorials to oppression and emancipation : rodin ’s “ burghers of calais , ” the statue of the suffragette emmeline pankhurst and the buxton memorial to the abolition of slavery . there is a good argument , which i accept , that the presence of these monuments makes victoria tower gardens an appropriate site for development . however , the proposed design of the holocaust memorial and learning centre is almost triple their size . the save victoria tower gardens campaign believes it will overwhelm the other monuments , perhaps making them fade away . the design was originally intended for a memorial in ottawa , canada , and it was imported here without much alteration and without taking into account the very different context . the save victoria tower gardens campaign also has legitimate concerns that such extreme development will harm the park itself , and this has been clear from the very beginning of the project . the secretary of state has left the chamber , so i ask the under - secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities , my hon . friend in response to the original public exhibition run by the uk holocaust memorial foundation , there was a clear concern that the excavation operations will cause significant harm to established trees and invite concern about flooding . during the planning process , i remember the environment agency making very clear its objection because of the flood risk to this place . the environment agency has since changed its mind , and i do not know why , but it was very clear at the time . equally important is that the scale of development will considerably change the feeling of the park . it is not just a statue or small monument ; this is a large - scale development that will need two storeys to be excavated for the learning centre . by its very design , it will lead to an increase in the number of visitors , which will distort the functionality of victoria tower gardens as a place of recreation . local people remain concerned that victoria tower gardens will cease to be a neighbourhood park and will become a civic space , dominated by the holocaust memorial and learning centre and its associated infrastructure and security installations . in the meantime , the park will become a building site for many , many years , leading to a serious loss of amenity for local people and more congestion and noise pollution . along with the restoration and renewal of the palace of westminster , residents will have the simultaneous repair of victoria tower , the replacement of the parliamentary education centre and a memorial construction that will last for years . my hon . friend is making an intelligent speech , and she speaks with authority as the local member of parliament . when she talks about the loss of the park , is she talking about the temporary disruption caused by the construction phase ? my understanding is that the park will remain . it will still be there in perpetuity for local people , but there will be a modest reduction in its size as a result of the memorial being built . we are not talking about the permanent loss of the park , are we ? my right hon . friend and i will have to agree to disagree , because this will change the nature of the park . at the moment , it is a community neighbourhood park . it has a playground at one end and a massive open space where local people , particularly children , can play , run around and take their dogs for a walk . the size of the current design will mean that the memorial completely changes the atmosphere of the park . may i perhaps help my hon . friend a little ? the estimate by the london historic parks & gardens trust is that up to 30 % of the park will be lost , so this is a major construction . in addition to the excellent point she is making , for some of us this comes down to the essential principle about a lack of consultation about the siting . the public were consulted and westminster city council said no , and the government have decided to override it . that troubles us ; as i have said before , it is not how we do things in this country . perhaps that is the central point here . i thank my hon . friend for his intervention . i was the leader of the council when the planning application was going through , and i remind the house that we were very surprised at the lack of consultation in many parts of the application . as i have said , there were 1,000 objections to the planning application within that process . the father of the house was right when he outlined the issues between 2015 and 2016 . it is also worth remembering that when the government decided to call in the application and take this away from westminster city council , they indicated that they had been asked to do that by the council — that was never true . let me just make a comment on the intervention by my right hon . friend i thank the father of the house for his intervention . i reassure him that i am not aware of any local authority that wants to have decisions on planning applications taken away from it at any time , but particularly not where such a major application is going to really affect local people , because of the loss of amenity they are going to feel from the loss of this park . i agree that more consultation should have taken place , as this will change the make - up of this neighbourhood park . i am a westminster resident , but many members come here for the working week and go home . they may use victoria tower gardens for doing a media interview , going for a walk at lunchtime or meeting friends . however , i can tell them that the park is a vital amenity for many local people , particularly those living in social housing , who do not have the benefit of gardens in their homes . taking away any amount of space from that public park will be a real shame . i appreciate that this is a hugely complex and emotional issue . however , concerns about the bill are not a nimby cause whereby the wish is to block all development . rather , they are rooted in the reality that there is very little support among local people for this memorial being placed in victoria tower gardens . that is on the grounds of loss of green space , increased visitor numbers , environmental concerns , traffic and the effect on surrounding monuments . rightly , there are strong policies in place about building on parks and public green spaces . it is obviously important to remember the horrors of the holocaust — of course it is — and to ensure that the next generation , the one after , the one after that and those that come after should never forget what happened in europe in the 1930s and 1940s , and subsequent genocides since then . but for many , especially those who live in crowded urban areas such as westminster , our neighbourhood parks and gardens are vital to the quality of residents ’ lives . that is why , for me , this is the right memorial but in the wrong location . after 27 years in this place , i suppose i should never be surprised about the direction in which debates go , but it is slightly unseemly that we are spending so much time talking about such an emotive matter , down to the location of a particular monument . i understand entirely the views of local people , but this is a national — indeed , international — centre of democracy , which has world importance . of course local residents matter , but so does the site itself , which has been here for centuries . i will make a case for the location that the government propose , but first let me reflect that today ’s debate takes place in the shadow of the most vile and appalling event : the unspeakable capacity of human beings to inflict the kinds of activities carried out by the nazis against the jews . part of our debate needs to reflect upon that , as well as looking at local issues . there is no doubt that a memorial is well overdue , but the minister may well feel that some of the discussion about location and the nature of the monument is unseemly . i urge the government to reflect carefully on the debate , and to try to get the discussion about where it is and how it is constructed out of here and into a place where a consensus can be arrived at . in the explanatory notes to the bill , the government say the memorial “ will help people understand the way the lessons of the holocaust apply more widely , including to other genocides . ” that makes me think of racism , which takes many different forms . for example , the slave trade is a great stain on our nation , and on other nations too . there are families and institutions that benefit from the wealth that originated from that horrible trade to this very day . why do i mention that ? i mention it because members of the house , who may have stood in the very place where i am standing now , fought against slavery , and it was in this house that the anti - slavery legislation was passed . we built an anti - slavery monument . where did we build it ? we built it next to our parliament , in the very location now proposed . as other members have said , the sculpture of the burghers of calais , an amazing monument to the human spirit , is in the same park , as well as a statue that is a tribute to the suffragettes . where else would we put a memorial to what happened in the holocaust but alongside our parliament , in the same place as those other sculptures ? i am enjoying the hon . gentleman ’s speech . the answer to his question is that the holocaust memorial , preferably without the basement box , could be put where the buxton family memorial was put , which was in parliament square . it does not have to be in victoria tower gardens . i thank the father of the house , who i always listen to with respect . he is widely respected , but on this matter he may be wrong . i occasionally go to the anti - slavery monument and to look at the burghers of calais , which is an amazing sculpture . i then sometimes quietly go and sit on one of the benches , watch the river go by and think about the struggles for emancipation over the centuries , so many of which happened in this very building . i am not sure that putting a monument of the kind we are talking about in parliament square , surrounded as it is by traffic , is necessarily conducive to the quiet reflection that i and many others experience in the park . i want to reflect on antisemitism , which was the root of the holocaust , and on my family ’s history . i have never spoken about this before , either in public or in private , but it has been on my mind throughout my life and i want to go through some issues , because antisemitism is on the rise . it has long disfigured so many parts of our western european culture , as well as parts of our nation . it is a vile , centuries old , unforgiveable hatred that gave rise to the most appalling crime here in europe in the last century . as i have said , we all still live in its shadows . fascism and the holocaust occurred in germany , but we must never pretend that antisemitism is solely restricted to that nation . i wish to reflect on the lives of previous generations of my family and on what i have seen . my ancestors escaped antisemitic pogroms not in germany , but in tsarist russia . they came to britain on their way to the united states . they stopped off in london — the great port of london — first . in victorian times , britain welcomed asylum seekers — jews escaping the tyranny of the time . it is hard to imagine whether that could happen today . although that is not the point that i wish to make , it is important to reflect on that . as i said , my family were on their way to america from what is now poland . they were heading for liverpool to get the boat across to new york and to freedom , as they saw it . they passed through leeds . the older generation had by then become aged and infirm , so it was left to my grandmother , the youngest daughter , to stay and care for them — that was the tradition . the rest went on to liverpool and then to chicago . i have cousins who finally arrived in the west , in california . it is odd in a way to reflect that those cousins have almost circumnavigated the globe across four generations of my family . let me focus on the leeds part of the family . they were hard - working cobblers — boot and shoe makers . they worked in a small place next to the synagogue on north street , leeds . there was a great jewish community there . although it was a tight - knit working class community , i heard many stories of harassment and racism , including violent attacks . the housing conditions were appalling — three generations living in slum housing , sharing one or , if they were lucky , two bedrooms . my grandparents had three children , one of whom was my mother . they lived in similar conditions . the house that i was brought up in was declared a slum and cleared . they were the generations of people who were building a life here . my grandmother regularly told me that she lived in fear of the pogroms , from which she , her parents and grandparents had suffered in russia . she said to me , “ here jon , i need to tell you something . whenever anyone unknown knocks on your door , you kid to be daft . ” that might not mean much to members in this place , but what she meant was to pretend to be stupid if somebody in a shirt and tie — a bit like i am dressed today — knocks on the door . in other words , do not comply with the wishes of strangers , especially those who look like they are in authority , because they may well be representatives of a hostile force . that was her experience . she had a lifelong fear of strangers and of authority . perhaps it was just one of her foibles , i do not know . equally , though , it might have reflected a part of the wider jewish experience . before the second world war , a stereotypical english gentleman who had attended winchester college , a public school , launched the british fascist party . he was supported by a section of the establishment as well as by people from all sectors of society . this was oswald mosley . he decided to lead his blackshirts through the jewish quarters in leeds , where my family lived . it was a naked attempt to mobilise antisemitic sentiments to distract residents from the post-1929 depression and the conditions that prevailed in leeds at the time . as a leeds - born citizen who eventually become leader of that great city ’s council , i am proud to tell the house that mosley was refused permission to march through the jewish areas . he did , however , rally his supporters on holbeck moor , in south leeds , not far from where i came to live . thirty thousand jewish people turned out to resist the fascists . jewish and gentile , socialists and communists , liberals and tories , trade unionists and fair - minded citizens , community groups and others rallied against mosley . there was a battle and mosley retired injured . members of my family were there . my mother and our family talked about that victory , but we did not fool ourselves that antisemitism had been quelled . then came the second world war and the ghastly news of the concentration camps , which i imagine even today chills the bones of all of us in this house . i do not want to exaggerate . leeds is a tolerant place . most people would say , “ live and let live ” . that is the kind of people they are in west yorkshire where i come from . when i was at school in the ‘ 50s and ‘ 60s , we lived on the edge of a large jewish community . we got on pretty well , and i do not mean to say that the school was a bad place at all , but there were antisemitic actions , language and bullying in that school . i am not a violent man — my mother taught me to believe in non - violence — but i will not hide the fact that at times there were fights and there was resistance to the antisemites at the margins of the school , all motivated by anti - jewish racism . as i entered my teens , my mother began to say to me , “ let ’s get out of here . ” she wanted me to go to israel to be on a kibbutz . the kibbutz seemed to offer a different way of living communally , inspired perhaps by some notions of common ownership , mutual endeavour , equality and peace . we decided that i would go to live on a kibbutz , but then the six - day war happened , and in any case we needed me to go out to work and earn a living at 16 . thinking about the six - day war , it is probably worth recording that our family knew that people could disagree with an elected government and its actions , but that that is not the same as hating a whole nation or even a race . we can clearly see today that there are many israelis who oppose their government , and no one would suggest that they are being antisemitic in doing so . i come now to a distasteful few sentences . when i joined the labour party in 1969 , there were many working - class jewish socialists in our part of leeds , and i never witnessed any antisemitism in any of those meetings . however , and i regret to have to record this , when i entered my constituency as the mp , only 12 miles away from leeds , i was subjected to the most shocking antisemitic comment by a party member . it was vile . equally , though , i am pleased to record that the individual concerned was confronted by fellow members for his outburst and was told he must never come back to another meeting . let me turn to one further final anecdote . i was out canvassing not so long ago in my constituency , which is in the wonderful area of wakefield , when a man who i knew had a reputation for being a nazi approached me . he was a man who could not control his emotions , a man with extreme anger , and he told me he was going to fill the streets with “ patriots ” , as he called them , and that they would eliminate people such as me from the area and from the country . it was a terrifying moment , but the police decided to record it as a hate crime and i am glad to say that he was charged and pled guilty to an antisemitic hate crime in leeds crown court . i hope that the house will understand that i have spoken in this way in order to condemn with every single fibre in my body all forms of racism and antisemitism . the holocaust is an appalling crime against our common humanity . it is right that we pledge today never to forgive or forget what happened , and never to let down our guard for a moment — because , while antiracism is a powerful force , antisemitism is still there and needs to be resisted . i thank the hon . gentleman for sharing that very personal and compelling account . i agree with everything he said . i think he said it was his grandmother who talked about the living scars in his family . i can say the same from my own experience . my father fled the holocaust with his mother , father and uncle , who have passed away . my grandmother , who was the living testimony in our family , passed away in 2005 . i understand all the planning and site discussions and deliberations , and i hope they can be resolved in committee , but the longer we talk about the technicalities , important as they are , the more we risk losing that living testimony without having something powerful to replace it . when i think about instilling the ethos of antisemitism in my children , that is the part that concerns me most . i am grateful to the right hon . gentleman and i agree with him . with my kind of politics , it is very rare that i agree with anybody on the conservative benches , but it is good to recognise that these strong pulses of hatred towards racism are shared by all of us in the house . finally , let the memorial stand as a reminder of the need to fight injustice , just as our country did in the second world war . this is not a battle that can be finally won ; it is a battle that we need to fight in each generation , and each one of us must stand in witness to what has happened . let the monument stand as a reproach to humanity , that our species is capable of the most unspeakable crimes — but equally , as a sign that we are prepared to sacrifice ourselves , as so many people in our military did , to fight for a better world . i rise to speak in favour of the bill , which i am pleased to see presented to the house for its second reading . i say for the record that i am secretary to the all - party parliamentary group on holocaust memorial . the need for a permanent memorial and learning centre to remember the lives of those who perished in the holocaust has never been more pressing , and i thank the government and colleagues from across the house for their commitment to this important project . before i kick off , it is worth reiterating a comment that the secretary of state made : the memorial will take up 7.5 % of the park . that is helpful context for the debate . i will focus my remarks on two important reasons why the memorial is needed now more than ever . first , as the number of survivors sadly dwindles , our generation has received the baton from those who experienced the atrocities of the holocaust to ensure that the lives lost are never forgotten . without a physical memorial , that task is not only more difficult but susceptible to being forgotten by successive generations . the placing of a permanent , physical and fitting memorial to the millions of lives lost is the best way to ensure that that does not happen , especially given that the memorial will be right at the heart of the country , adjacent to parliament . the juxtaposition of the mother of all parliaments standing next to an ever - lasting memorial immortalising those who perished in one of the world ’s worst periods could not be more stark . the new memorial and learning centre in victoria tower gardens will be among many other national memorials , and will place the uk on a par with countless other countries across the world . it will also demonstrate that holocaust memorial is a national priority that we take seriously . on sir ben dedicated most of his life to educating others about the atrocities of the holocaust . it is unfortunate that , although the memorial and learning centre was promised eight years ago , sir ben did not have the opportunity to see it for himself . he said that he had hoped to “ one day take my family to the new national memorial and learning centre , telling the story of britain and the holocaust . ” i can think of no better way to honour sir ben ’s life and legacy than for this house to vote in favour of the bill and ensure that there is no further delay to the building . the second reason it is essential that the memorial is built is the rise in antisemitism , in the uk and globally . i speak as the co - chair of the appg on antisemitism when i say that education is the most effective way to combat the appalling rise in jew hatred . i am delighted that the memorial will be accompanied by a learning centre so that people from across the country , as well as visitors from abroad , will be able to learn about what took place . social media has made it much easier for misinformation to spread and for conspiracy theories to take hold in the minds of many . the learning centre will provide meaningful education , which , alongside holocaust education on the national curriculum , will help to counter antisemitism and ensure that a wide range of people are able to benefit from the teaching on offer . i would like to end by quoting the chief rabbi , who perfectly summed up why we can not delay the memorial any further . he said of holocaust survivors : “ there ’s a panic in their voices . they are saying one thing to me . please , world , never forget . they know they can not live forever . they are asking us to be their ambassadors . they fear the world will forget in the course of time . we have a responsibility to ensure we will remember ” . i encourage all members to vote to ensure that we do just that . i , too , rise to support the construction of the holocaust memorial and learning centre . i hope that we will be able to remove any remaining barriers and get the work started as soon as possible . we have heard important voices , including my friend the father of the house , a memorial speaks louder than the badges we sometimes wear in this chamber . it is a mark of our pledge to interfere and disrupt when we see mass murder , racial injustice , and acts of terror carried out by weak and failing governments in their increasingly desperate pursuit of ultimate power over their own citizens . we see and condemn the treatment of people in ethiopia , the hazara persecuted in afghanistan , uyghurs , rohingya , ahmadi , baluch and christians around the world , but closer to home , our own recent past with regard to antisemitism is nothing to be proud of either , and we have heard a lot today about how it is absolutely on the rise . my party in particular has moved considerably in the past few years , but that does not eliminate the need to be open and honest about our shameful record . a change of leadership and the adoption of a tougher approach are not necessarily all we need to do . when those of us who did speak up were trolled , hounded and harassed , particularly as new mps , we received absolutely no support whatsoever . indeed , the supporters of our former leader used his name in the written or verbal attacks spat at us across the rooms in which meetings were held . although the majority of that unpleasant minority group of members decided to leave the labour party on the election of a new leader , some do shamefully remain . in march 2018 , when the jewish community felt they had no choice but to gather in protest , they chose parliament square and peacefully held placards reading , “ enough is enough ” . while many members of our shadow cabinet and front - bench mps chose to do and say absolutely nothing — present company excepted — those of us who attended that rally to support our jewish friends and colleagues were watched by a senior member of the former leader ’s staff , who stood under the arches as we re - entered through carriage gates and wrote down in his notebook the names of all who attended . there followed almost two more years of relentless calls for some of us to be deselected and removed from our seats , with former colleagues and activist journalists inciting social media pile - ons , appearing at rallies and roadshows , and sharing platforms alongside celebrity socialists . decent jewish women , democratically elected as members of parliament , felt that they had no choice but to step away from this place . we must never allow such things to happen again . for me , a memorial is a reminder to fight antisemitism wherever and whenever we see it , reminding ourselves that in the evil design to create a so - called aryan master race , hitler and the nazis targeted and murdered millions of jews , roma and gay people . we can not ever be complacent , and that nudge to remember ought to be somewhere we in this house can see and visit . i will end with the words of karen pollock , chief executive of the holocaust educational trust and friend to many in this house — my hon . friend “ it is crucial to remember that the holocaust memorial — and remembering the holocaust in general — is not about planning permission , or square footage , or underground pipes . what these discussions are about at their heart , is people . people who were subjected to unimaginable suffering , simply because they were jewish . people who were stripped of their homes , their citizenship and their dignity ; and forced into overcrowded ghettos , labour camps , and concentration camps . people who were made to dig their own graves and were shot into pits in forests and ravines across europe , or gassed to death in purpose - built killing centres . and it is about people who against all odds survived , and made their home here in the uk . ” that is what we need to never forget . if there is a tangible reminder on our very doorstep , we have no excuse to ignore the plight of others persecuted by evil despotic regimes around the globe . it is a pleasure to follow it is in that context that i welcome the bill , and i congratulate both front benchers , my right hon . friend on that point , we should give some thought , consideration and support to many of the leaders within the jewish community , including those from the jewish leadership council . i have had the privilege of working with the cst and its leadership , both during my time as home secretary and as a member of parliament . it is so sobering that the reason why the cst exists today is still to protect the jewish community while they live their lives , day in , day out . i still have parents who live with the jewish community in a part of hertfordshire and , when i visit them , we still see local private security firms outside the synagogue , driving up and down our roads to protect the community . we have incredible jewish schools that are protected , day in , day out — as we have heard today from testimony in this house — by private security firms . that is because of the rise of antisemitism , the level of intolerance and the hatred that wrongly exists across society , which is why education is so vital . of course , the holocaust marked one of the darkest and most sinister moments in the history of humanity . none of us can forget that , and we do not want any future generations to forget it , either . this is how we improve ourselves as human beings ; it is how we learn to respect one another , work with each other and live alongside each other , regardless of our backgrounds , our faith or anything of that nature . that cruelty , shown in the most systematic persecution and that awful , barbaric phrase , “ the extermination of the jewish people in europe”—it is a horrible sentence to even utter — along with the persecution and murder of other minority groups , continues to shock . it shakes us to our core as human beings , but it did happen in that way , and we have a responsibility and a moral duty to remember the barbarism that took place back then . six million people were the victims of genocide , motivated — let us just think about this — by hatred , prejudice , and an intolerable and evil ideology . i want in particular to pay tribute to the holocaust memorial day trust and the holocaust educational trust for the work they do . i also pay tribute — i am going to say this now — to many colleagues in this house , such as those who represent communities and those on the appgs , but also those who have given voice to some of the intolerance that we see , day in , day out , and who champion their communities across the country . i am afraid that , even in my time as home secretary , i witnessed the most abhorrent antisemitism . representatives from the jewish community came to see me frequently , i am sorry to say . we obviously worked with the police — we had to work with the police — to bring justice to members of the community . i recall — in fact , it was only two years ago — that we had those awful car rallies coming from certain parts of the country straight into north london , with the most vile abuse , hatred , intolerance and threats to harm and hurt members of the jewish community taking place . these organisations work tirelessly to educate and inform in our schools and elsewhere about the horrors of the past , the holocaust and other genocides . we should also remember other genocides that have taken place , and frequently too . it is important to spread and communicate the “ never again ” message and to dispel some of the appalling narratives that have existed and the language that is used against these communities . the holocaust memorial day trust and the holocaust educational trust do incredible work — we have seen this — in organising visits to auschwitz and in the run - up to holocaust memorial day on the new memorial and learning centre will be an incredible facility for future generations and young people to come together , yes , to be educated and to learn about the horrors of the past , but also to make sure that such events actually change the way in which we think , for the betterment of humanity and society . many of us have met holocaust survivors or heard them speak — i have had the incredible privilege of meeting many , and also of growing up alongside some of them when i lived in radlett in hertfordshire . we have been moved by the accounts of the suffering and the loss . if i may , i will just commend the stories of resilience , the inspirational tales and the fortitude have gone on to define the jewish community ’s successive generations . they have experienced and survived unimaginable suffering , and i pay tribute to them . i think frequently , given where i base myself now , in north london , about their own suffering , but also about the courage they still have to speak about their experiences and the campaigns they have led . it is 78 years since the concentration camps , which were the sites of such horrors , were liberated , and thank goodness they were liberated . as each year passes , the number of holocaust survivors , sadly , reduces . so we think of them on a day like today , and i think we are privileged in this house to even have this debate to reflect and to recognise the past and the horrors , but also to pay tribute to them . i say that again within the context of what we see in this modern day , with antisemitism on the rise , social media intolerance , and abuse and trolling , which the hon . member for canterbury has spoken about . that is why i think this bill is so important . i would like to see it pass , but i also think that we have to demonstrate respect for many of the concerns that have been raised today ; it is right that we do that in a very respectful way . i personally think that there can be no better place in our country to have a memorial located , at the heart of democracy , because it is a reminder of how fragile and precious our democracy is . we look around the world right now , and at how the flame of democracy can so easily be extinguished . earlier today , there was a debate in westminster hall on hong kong , where people have been fleeing for their lives because of the national security laws . this is also about the importance of our country standing up against those who commit such atrocities in the world , and our commitment to defend freedom , liberty and human rights . the bill reflects that in the right way , and i am confident that the centre can be built in a sympathetic and respectful way . i hope that colleagues will work to ensure that that happens . that is why i support the passage of the bill . i know that all colleagues will work with mutual recognition and respect for many of the sensitivities that have been aired today . i rise to support the bill , and i speak as vice - chair of the all - party group on the holocaust memorial . i think that this is long overdue . it is taking too long to make progress on this important project . it is a project of real significance for us as a nation , as has been demonstrated on several occasions already during the debate . when we talk about the holocaust and the suffering — i made this point earlier in an intervention on the secretary of state — we are talking not just about somebody else ’s history ; we are talking about our history and our national story as well . i pay tribute to my right hon . friend i place on record my thanks and appreciation to the co - chairs of this national project , lord pickles , my good friend , and the right honourable ed balls . the fact that they are working so strongly and so well together speaks volumes about the cross - party consensus and support that underpin this project and they continue to do tireless work . as other members have done , i pay tribute to the work of the holocaust educational trust and the holocaust memorial day trust for the work they do out in communities , and with young people doing holocaust education , ensuring that the important lessons of history continue to be learned . i also thank both those organisations for the work they do in parliament , because they organise meetings that many of us have been to . we have had the privilege of meeting holocaust survivors they have introduced us to in parliament . many of us have sat in jaw - dropping awe when we have listened to those holocaust survivors talk about their experiences , and about what they saw , witnessed and suffered during those dark years at the end of the 1930s and into the 1940s . they left us in wonder at how they could speak with such grace about reconciliation , unity and peace . as many members have said , it is their memory , and the work they do , that we need to preserve . we have heard tributes to sir ben helfgott , who sadly died on i listened with great interest to my hon . friend i hope that the bill passes tonight with such a strong message of support that it is clear we need to get on and do it . i think the memorial can be done sympathetically . i do not know whether it will take up 7.5 % of victoria tower gardens or a different figure — we have heard three different figures already this afternoon — but my understanding is that it will occupy only a modest space in the park and that the vast majority of it will still be left for local residents . as with so many other significant developments — we see this in our own constituencies and regions as well — it is impossible to get unanimity on a particular location . my hon . friend this has been a debate in two parts . first , we have heard moving testimony from members on both sides of the house about the evils of antisemitism and some personal experiences , particularly from then we have had two well researched , well thought - out speeches from my hon . friend this is such an important issue , and we are all united in wanting to do it well , so we should ensure that the memorial is done well . i have been to the holocaust museums in berlin and washington . they are the most comprehensive , moving , enormous edifices . people are taken through a whole series of rooms , explaining exactly how antisemitism originated and the final result of the holocaust . we should have that sort of holocaust museum in london . the problem is that this site is so constrained that it can not do justice to the cause and to the issue . we will have to dig down into the park and , while the centre will have two storeys , it will have only a couple of rooms , which will not allow the whole narrative to be developed . that is why the imperial war museum , which already has a good holocaust gallery , was quite right to make its offer . there is a lot of space next to that museum , and it was prepared — i am sure that it is prepared — to develop a world - class holocaust museum . i join my hon . friend the member for worthing west in suggesting a compromise . i have asked a series of questions about this . i declare an interest in that i , like many members of parliament , live half a mile or a mile away and of course work in this building . i am conscious that , as my hon . friend the member for cities of london and westminster said , this is one of the most overcrowded parts of the united kingdom . literally thousands of people live and work extremely close to this very small park . anyone who goes there on a summer ’s afternoon , like those we have had in recent days , will see every inch of it packed with people who work and live in westminster trying to get a bit of sun and air and green . i have suggested a compromise to the secretary of state and to many others . i , and i think many others , am perfectly happy with the concept of having a memorial to the holocaust in the park . such a memorial could be aesthetically pleasing , dynamic and express the whole issue in powerful terms . i am conscious of the superb monuments that we already have in the park , which , for instance , detail anti - slavery . this country led the world campaign against the slave trade , and the buxton memorial explains that campaign powerfully in an aesthetically beautiful way . there is also the superb rodin monument , the burghers of calais , which explains that story in a powerful way , and the superb pankhurst monument , which powerfully proclaims the fight for votes for women . i have always argued that it would be perfectly possible to have a monument fairly close to the playground that would tell the story but not , as my hon . friend said , overpower the park . the trouble with the ottawa monument , which we are importing , is that it is simply huge . it is a vast mound with great metal spikes sticking out of it . it is frankly hideous , and it would completely or partially block from that end of the park the iconic view of the palace of westminster , which is the subject of thousands of photographs and pictures . as my hon . friend the member for worthing west said , if we had started the process without proposing a totally inadequate underground learning centre and just satisfied ourselves with a monument , that could already have been built . people give the powerful message that we should get on with this , so let us get on with building the monument . whether we build it in victoria tower gardens or on college green , as he said , let us get on with it . we do not need to start by building the underground learning centre . the letter to the times on the gardens are under the purview of the royal parks , which has never supported siting such a prominent and large memorial there . its chairman , loyd grossman , wrote to me specifically to clarify that . he said that the royal parks “ has concerns about the potential risk of such a building on the intrinsic qualities of a well - used public park in an area of the city with a limited number of open spaces . ” there are concerns that if that beautiful space is sacrificed , it would create a precedent that could be repeated in other green spaces under the management of the royal parks . everyone knows that the park is frequently used on a daily basis by visitors to the city , those who work nearby and local residents . it would simply be impossible for victoria tower gardens to continue in its current , useful way if the plan goes ahead . the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 introduced statutory protections for victoria tower gardens that are being decisively undermined . that act of parliament was solemnly created to provide a green space for working class people in the middle of westminster . the purpose of the memorial is to commemorate victims of this great crime , and to teach current and future generations . that means that we want many people to go there . we hope that it will be well used . there are practical points : the existing pressures on millbank will only be compounded by traffic related to people accessing the memorial . we have not been informed of any plans to deal with coach traffic and halting , which putting the memorial there would be bound to generate . there are no parking spaces or drop - off zones for coaches . the local thorney island society has stated that it is “ obviously very concerned at the loss of this small valuable park , because it is difficult to imagine that a project of this size and importance would not dominate the space and transform it from a tranquil local park to a busy civic space ” . the subterranean nature of the plans for the holocaust memorial add a further layer of complication to using victoria tower gardens . this is a riparian location , right on the banks of the river thames . as recently as june 2016 , 50 local properties were flooded from underneath following heavy downpours . in such ancient marshland , it is all too easy for the water table to rise alarmingly when there is a period of sudden and heavy rainfall . further objections can be raised on the grounds that victoria tower gardens is already home to existing memorials of a smaller but appropriate scale , as i have mentioned . those incredibly important memorials to the slave trade and to votes for women will be overshadowed . the design remit sent out to architecture firms competing to design the memorial included the criterion that the monument must “ enhance victoria tower gardens — improving the visual and sensory experience of the green space ” . this plan simply does not meet that criterion . instead , we will have an 80 - metre ramp , creating a wide moat splitting the park , with paving areas replacing swathes of grass . since it was created , victoria tower gardens has been associated with an uninterrupted sweep of grass between magnificent rows of trees , superbly framing the palace of westminster and victoria tower . if the plan goes ahead , that splendid view will be lost forever . i sit on the programme board for the restoration and renewal of the palace of westminster . the holocaust memorial project has a direct impact on this huge undertaking . mr deputy speaker , as you are also on the board , you will know those problems well . renovating the palace will take many years — almost certainly over a decade . to do the job well , effectively and with good value for money , we will need as much flexibility as possible . some part of victoria tower gardens will be useful as a staging ground for the works that will be undertaken at the palace . we need as much wiggle room as possible . the holocaust memorial would make working on the palace more constrictive and possibly more costly in both time and money . there are suitable alternative locations . i want to stress this point : instead of building an entirely new holocaust learning centre , why do the government not take advantage of the imperial war museum , where there is plenty of room ? this site at the imperial war museum is less than half a mile away from the current proposed site , so it would still be an accessible and prominent central london location . i repeat that almost nobody objects to having a memorial in the park but not the underground learning centre . for all those reasons — especially those given by my hon . friend i rise to support this excellent bill and to oppose the reasoned amendment . it is a pleasure to follow my right hon . friend i declare my interest as co - chairman since 2018 of the holocaust memorial all - party group . we have sought to obtain progress on the establishment of the holocaust memorial and learning centre , but progress has been too slow . when we talk about the holocaust , it is hard to comprehend how 6 million men , women and children could systematically be murdered . when i was at school in wembley , half of my class were jewish and the rest of various other religions , but never ever were we taught about the holocaust . it was not spoken about . jewish families in our area did not talk about the holocaust ; they chose to try to forget it . it is only relatively recently that we have spoken about the holocaust and its horrors . that is why the work of the holocaust educational trust and the holocaust memorial day trust in educating our young people , and the not - so - young , about what actually happened is so important . does the hon . gentleman agree that we should be full of admiration for the work of the holocaust educational trust and for the visits to the sites of terrible atrocities across europe ? does he also agree that any visit to auschwitz or another such site does more than bring home to people how devastating this all was ? it seems to have happened just yesterday . that is why it is so right of him to reinforce the point that these events must never be forgotten and should be part of the education syllabus . i thank the hon . gentleman for that intervention . like many others , i have been to auschwitz . i went there with constituents and saw the true horrors — but today is not the day for remembering auschwitz - birkenau or any other camp ; it is for dealing with the horrors of antisemitism . my wife ’s family fled germany in the early 20th century ; even back then , antisemitism was rife . also in the early 20th century , way before the great war and before the holocaust started , my family fled france because of antisemitism and programmes in operation in that country . this problem is not confined to one particular country . most people would say the holocaust began around 1933 , when the nazis gained power in germany ; although they had a minority of the vote , they were ruthless . the german population were experiencing very tough times , with hyperinflation and severe reparations to pay in the wake of the great war . in such times , they sought a scapegoat , and in “ mein kampf ” we see exactly where the finger was pointed , namely at the jewish population . civilians had no qualms about turning their backs on jewish friends or neighbours , and we should remember that . they isolated them from society . the momentum grew , and jewish businesses were attacked , books were burnt , and stringent regulations restricted the freedom of jews in the country . we should also remember , however , that of the 6 million jews who were murdered by the nazis , only 100,000 were german jews . most of those who saw this coming got out of germany as fast as they could . in 1938 , on the awful “ night of broken glass”—more commonly referred to as kristallnacht — nazi mobs , ss troops and ordinary citizens torched synagogues throughout germany . they destroyed german homes , schools , businesses , hospitals and cemeteries . when the second world war broke out in 1939 , the persecution escalated severely . the antisemitic undertones had now become grave systematic murder . there is no doubt that the holocaust is one of the most tragic events that the world has seen , and the brutal , wicked murder of 6 million jewish men , women and children by the nazis and their collaborators during the second world war must never be forgotten . the conditions undergone by jewish communities during that time are incomprehensible today . the testimonies of survivors paint a grave picture of what happened in the concentration camps : initially forced labour , then starvation , gas chambers and minimal hope of survival . maria ossowski , a brave holocaust survivor , described the experience as one “ which will haunt me all my life . ” even today , those survivors and their families must live with the remnants of their past , to which they were subjected simply because they were jewish . it is essential that we commemorate the hardships that were undergone , to preserve the extraordinary stories of survival and give our future generations an accurate account of history in order to educate them and prevent such scenarios from ever occurring again . we must do all that we can to prevent genocides in any form and in any part of the world — the killing of innocent people simply because they are the wrong type of people . the memorial will serve as a national monument to commemorate the men , women and children lost during the holocaust . alongside it will be an education and learning centre , an accurate and detailed account of this slice of history with testimonies — this is an important element — from a british perspective . many members who are present will have visited memorials dedicated to the jewish struggle , such as yad vashem in israel . in 1992 i had the opportunity to visit the original yad vashem , which was even more powerful than the yad vashem of today , because it was more personal and intense . today ’s yad vashem is a much bigger , bolder museum , but loses some of the original , key intentions . however , the powerful audio - visual exhibitions and the stories told by survivors send an exceptionally powerful message to visitors , ensuring that those narratives will live on forever as a stark reminder . it is expected that our site will attract half a million visitors a year , which emphasises how wide the outreach of the project will be . the holocaust is fast moving from living history to just history . sadly , holocaust survivors are dying , and far too many have passed on already . it is therefore important that we build the memorial at the earliest possible opportunity to pay tribute to those who have suffered in both the past and the present . the longer we take with this project , the fewer survivors will be left to see the finished memorial . prime minister david cameron began the process in 2014 , some eight years ago , and we still have no memorial . devastatingly , we have lost many survivors in the last eight years , including the iconic zigi shipper . we need to press on urgently to ensure that as many as possible can be there to see this important site opened . holocaust survivor manfred goldberg bem recently put the situation in perfect perspective , saying : “ i was 84 when prime minister david cameron first promised us survivors a national holocaust memorial in close proximity to the houses of parliament . last month i celebrated my 93rd birthday and i pray to be able to attend the opening of this important project . ” the prime minister at the time announced that the holocaust commission was to examine what more should be done in britain to ensure that the memory of the holocaust is preserved and its lessons are never forgotten . the commission concluded that a national memorial should be built , stating : “ the evidence is clear that there should be a striking new memorial to serve as the focal point for national commemoration of the holocaust . it should be prominently located in central london to attract the largest possible number of visitors and to make a bold statement about the importance britain places on preserving the memory of the holocaust . it would stand as a permanent affirmation of the values of british society . ” i could not have put it better myself . however , eight years on , we have made little or no progress , and with the complex parliamentary process it is predicted that things will take a further four years . that adds up to 12 years and counting — longer than the second world war and longer than the holocaust itself . there has been much discussion of the proposed location of the memorial . i thank my hon . friend the bill will permit victoria tower gardens to house the memorial . no place in britain is more suitable for a holocaust memorial and learning centre than victoria tower gardens — right next to parliament , the very institution where decisions on britain ’s response were made in the lead - up to the holocaust , during it and in its aftermath . i hope that we will see detail about the decisions that were made , what people knew about what was going on in the holocaust , and what we did as a nation as a result . the memorial will serve as a reminder of the potential for abuse of democratic institutions and its murderous consequences , in stark contrast to the true role of democracy in standing up to and combating racism , hatred and prejudice . only parliament can change the law . it is right that parliament should consider whether the unique significance of the holocaust justifies seeking an exception to the protections mentioned by my right hon . friend the member for gainsborough , which were put in place by parliament more than a century ago . i am aware that , for many reasons , several of my colleagues oppose the development . i hope that i can defuse their concerns and persuade them that this significant project should get the backing it deserves and that current plans should be protected . the proposals for the memorial include sensitive landscaping that will improve victoria tower gardens for all users . more than 90 % of the area of the gardens will remain fully open after the memorial is built . local residents and workers will be able to visit and enjoy the gardens just as they do now . further , it is important that the relevant section of the unique legislation that we seek to override — the 1900 act — applies only to victoria tower gardens , meaning that the bill will not impact any future development rights at other sites . in response to the many concerns about the environmental impact of the site , i am assured that landscape improvements to victoria tower gardens will ensure that this important and well - used green space is made even more attractive and accessible than ever before . the new development will take only 7.5 % of the current area , and all the mature london plane trees will be protected . additional planting and improved drainage of the grassed area will increase the overall attractiveness of the gardens and reduce any potential risks of flooding . there will still be a clear and unobstructed view of parliament from all areas of the park . it is important to note that the holocaust memorial will not be the only memorial on the site . the buxton memorial , as has been mentioned , was placed in victoria tower gardens in 1957 to commemorate the emancipation of slaves in the british empire . for years , this well - placed memorial has attracted visitors and become a loved and popular part of the park . how many times bigger than the buxton memorial is this proposed memorial ? it is many times bigger , and it will completely overshadow it . it is clearly a very different type of memorial . my right hon . friend is referring to the holocaust memorial and the learning centre combined , but the learning centre will be underground . only 7.5 % of the park will be used for this purpose . the holocaust memorial will complement the buxton memorial , being no greater in height and with bronze fins designed to step down progressively to the east , in visual deference to the buxton memorial . the father of the house has suggested that the memorial would be better placed at the imperial war museum . contrary to those comments , the imperial war museum has said it supports the current plans for the memorial to be situated in victoria tower gardens and that it has no wish for the memorial to be built on its site . i reject the claim that the jewish community does not want this memorial , which i can not believe has been put forward and is simply untrue . of course , as with any community , the jewish community is not homogeneous — it does not agree on everything — and there will always be a difference of opinion to some degree . but the vast majority are in agreement that the proposals are good and that there is an urgent need to crack on with the project . prominent supporters of the memorial include the chief rabbi , the president of the board of deputies of british jews , the chair of the jewish leadership council and the chief executive of the holocaust educational trust , as well as many holocaust survivors . throughout this process , there have been multiple consultations with members of the jewish and survivor community . at every stage of the previous planning inquiry , individuals and groups were able to give written and oral evidence , which has been crucial to shaping the development . when we get through the parliamentary process , i hope they will have the same rights , as we would expect . it is quite clear that the majority of the house agrees with the proposals , and we are determined , dedicated and devoted to ensuring the plans become reality as soon as possible . we must remember the horrors that people had to live through during that atrocious point in history , in order to ensure their stories are preserved as lessons for generations to come . in deference to my hon . friend “ i look forward to one day taking my family to the new national memorial and learning centre , telling the story of britain and the holocaust . and one day , i hope that my children and grandchildren will take their children and grandchildren , and that they will remember all those who came before them , including my mother sara , my sister lusia , and my father moishe . ” sadly , he died earlier this year , but i have no doubt that , with this memorial and learning centre , his memory and story will live on for his children , grandchildren and future generations to enjoy for many years . i support the bill . it is a pleasure to follow i start by thanking all the hon . and right hon . members who have taken part in this debate : the father of the house ; the right hon . members for witham ( priti patel ) , for gainsborough ( sir edward leigh ) and for preseli pembrokeshire ( stephen crabb ) ; the hon . members for east renfrewshire ( kirsten oswald ) , for cities of london and westminster ( nickie aiken ) , for west bromwich east ( nicola richards ) and for harrow east ; and my hon . friends the members for hemsworth ( jon trickett ) and for canterbury ( rosie duffield ) . each made their respective case with both force and clarity . the bill concerns a matter that arouses strong emotions , and the debate has understandably reflected that fact , but everyone who has contributed this afternoon has done so in a considered and respectful way that has done justice to the significance of the issue at hand . whatever differences might exist about precisely how we do so , we are united as a house in our commitment to remembering and learning from the holocaust . the opposition ’s position on the bill is clear and unambiguous . as my hon . friend the shadow secretary of state made clear at the outset of the debate , we support the construction of a national holocaust memorial and learning centre in victoria tower gardens , and we therefore welcome the bill as a means to facilitate its establishment . many who have spoken in the debate have touched upon the rationale for creating a national holocaust memorial and learning centre . as we have heard , the idea was first proposed in 2015 , and it has enjoyed cross - party support from its inception . in the eight years that have passed since the idea was first mooted , the case for such a monument and institution has only grown . that is not only because of the alarming rise of anti - jewish hate in recent years , but because as the number of those who survived the shoah dwindles and those who still remain with us grow ever frailer , it is essential that we as a country do more to preserve the memory of this unique act of evil and those who perished in it . it is also imperative that we continue to educate future generations about what happened , both as a mark of respect to those who were lost and those who survived , and as a warning about what happens when antisemitism , prejudice and hatred are allowed to flourish unchecked . once constructed , the memorial will stand as a permanent reminder of the horrors of the past , and the need for a democratic citizenry to remain ever vigilant and willing to act when the values that underpin a free and tolerant society are undermined or threatened . we on the opposition benches believe it is particularly important that the thematic exhibition that the proposed learning centre will house is not only engaging and reflective , but honest about britain ’s complicated relationship with the holocaust . the proximity of the proposed memorial and learning centre to this house can not and should not be taken to imply that the united kingdom and its parliament have an unimpeachable record when it comes to the knowledge of , and response to , the systematic mass killing of jews by the nazi regime . let us put it on the record that , as winston churchill said , only one nation in the entire world fought nazism and fascism from day one of the war to the last day of the war — it was this country and this parliament . i thank the right hon . gentleman for that intervention . i agree with him , although he will know of the many voices of dissent both at the time of and in the years leading up to the moment in which we took that stand . as i was going to say , the proximity of the proposed site renders it all the more important to confront openly the ambiguous and varied responses — and there were some — of our country ’s parliament , government and society to the still unsurpassed crimes that were carried out by nazi germany and its collaborators . we have heard about those examples today . as the debate winds up , i want to take the opportunity , once again , to put on record our thanks to all those who have been involved in advancing this project , and holocaust education more generally , in recent years . the full list is far too extensive to read into the record , but they include the past and present members of the uk holocaust memorial foundation , including the right honourable ed balls , the right honourable lord eric pickles and chief rabbi ephraim mirvis ; all those involved in developing the exhibition ’s narrative , particularly yehudit shendar , who is providing the curatorial lead ; all the organisations that have striven to embed holocaust and genocide education and commemoration in our national life , particularly the holocaust memorial day trust and the holocaust educational trust ; and finally , all the holocaust survivors who have campaigned for holocaust education and personally championed the project , including a number who will sadly not now see it come to fruition . in that regard , those of us on the opposition side of the house think in particular of sir ben helfgott , and convey our thoughts and sincere condolences to his family and friends . i have felt it necessary to dwell again at some length on the rationale for establishing a national holocaust memorial and learning centre , given the bill ’s ultimate purpose , but as has been mentioned , the principle of doing so is almost entirely uncontested and not an issue that arises directly from the bill . instead , the bill is concerned with making provision for , and in connection with , significant expenditure related to the establishment of the proposed memorial and centre , and removing pre - existing legislative impediments that exist to the siting of it in victoria tower gardens , namely sections of the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 , so that progress towards construction can be made . i want to make it clear once again that the opposition appreciate fully that the selection of victoria tower gardens as the chosen location for the memorial and centre has attracted robust and principled criticism and , in some cases , outright opposition , including from prominent members of the jewish community and holocaust survivors . several of those who contributed to the debate today have articulated some of the criticisms and objections that have been made in that regard . the reasoned amendment in the name of the father of the house sets out a number of them . as we have heard , concerns about the proposed location include the impact on the construction process ; rising build costs ; the potential generation of additional traffic in the area ; security risks ; environmental protections ; the loss of public green space and amenity ; and the impact on existing monuments and memorials . when the national audit office carried out its report last year , it thought the cost had gone up to £ 102 million . since then , we will probably need to add an extra 15 % , because of inflation in construction . the expansion at yad vashem , which was referred to by hon . members , was completed for $ 100 million , so we will be spending much more for much less . i am not saying this to change the hon . gentleman ’s argument — i am grateful for the way he is summarising the debate , and he is doing it very fairly . i thank the father of the house . build cost inflation is a serious issue , not just in relation to this project but across the country . that would be the case wherever the chosen location was if we are to move ahead with the memorial , as we must , but i take his point , which is a good one . we know the concerns that have been raised about the adequacy of historical consultation . while the planning inquiry that took place in october 2022 enabled all interested parties to express their views and to raise these and other concerns and suggestions , the opposition believe it is important that those with outstanding criticisms and objections have a chance to express them fully and be heard . the hybrid nature of the bill and the resulting petitioning window that will be provided as a result of its designation will ensure that they are . we hope that the government will reflect carefully on the specific points that have been raised in the debate today . however , it is the considered view of labour members that this bill needs to progress and that , amended or otherwise , it must receive royal assent as soon as is practically possible . there really can be no further delay if we are to have any chance whatsoever of having this vitally important project finally completed while at least some of those who survived the holocaust and made britain their home are still with us . i think that would be the sincere wish of the whole house . it is a real pleasure to conclude the debate . i sincerely thank members from across the house for their thoughtful , powerful and often very personal contributions to the debate . i was moved to hear such support for the principles of this bill from all sides of the house . together we can put our personal politics to one side and get the holocaust memorial built , while there are still holocaust survivors alive to see it . regrettably , it is a sombre truth that holocaust survivors who found solace in the united kingdom are passing away , so we can not let this opportunity pass us by . we must pass this bill . we must ensure that future generations remember tomorrow . as my right hon . friend the secretary of state said , the bill will enable us to keep that solemn promise . through it , we are pursuing our manifesto commitment and a moral commitment . it is encouraging to know that there is broad agreement about the need for a prominent national holocaust memorial and learning centre , even among those few dissenting voices who have expressed concerns about the site in victoria tower gardens . what is not in dispute is that its location at the heart of our democracy has an unmatchable historical , emotional and political significance . i wish to spend a few moments replying to some of the concerns that have been mentioned , first , in the reasoned amendment , and , secondly , in some of the speeches . we are opposing the amendment . many of these issues were examined in depth at the six - week public inquiry in 2020 . in his overall conclusion , the planning inspector was clear that the significant range of truly civic , educative , social and even moral public benefits that the proposals offer would demonstrably outweigh the identified harms that the proposals have been found to cause . a number of members , including my hon . friend and neighbour i appreciate what the minister is saying about the 7.5 % . however , does she agree that placing the memorial and the learning centre in victoria tower gardens will change the whole atmosphere of the area , which is currently a neighbourhood park to a civic area . it is our full intention that all activities that , at the moment , occur in the park can continue to do so , and we are being very sensitive in our design of the memorial and the learning centre . on the 7.5 % point , i wish to note that the planning inspector , in his decision , recorded that the figure was agreed by all the main parties to the inquiry . i also want to say that the gardens will be enhanced in many ways with new planting , better drainage and more accessible seating . it is important also to note that the holocaust memorial bill itself can not and will not do anything to alter environmental and green space protections . the bill will remove the statutory obstacle to building the memorial and learning centre in victoria tower gardens , it does not provide any sort of planning permission and other necessary consents . these are contingent on an entirely separate planning permission . i wish to pick up on a few other points that were raised . on trees , i want to reassure everyone that all the mature london plane trees will be protected , and additional planting will increase the overall attractiveness . we are taking measures to minimise the risk of damage to tree roots . flooding was also mentioned . a detailed flood - risk assessment prepared as part of the planning application has concluded that victoria tower gardens is heavily protected . however , we take the risk of flooding very seriously , the environment agency has sought planning conditions relating to the condition of the river wall , which we are happy to comply with . the buxton memorial and the concerns about it being overshadowed were mentioned . i want to stress that the design of the memorial means that the buxton memorial will be kept in its current position and , with the addition of new landscaping and seating , its setting will be improved . the memorial will be no higher than the top of the buxton memorial and the fins will step down progressively . concerns were raised about the interaction with the restoration and renewal programme . i just want to stress that the memorial site is at the southern end of victoria tower gardens and need not prevent the use of the gardens as required by the r&r project for site offices . there was mention of having the memorial at the imperial war museum . i reiterate that the imperial war museum is very supportive of our proposals and , indeed , the chair sits on the foundation board . there was also mention of the fact that the learning centre was too small , but it is of a comparable size to that of the exhibition space underground in berlin . in the reasoned amendment there was mention of the fact that there should be an endowment fund for education , but nothing that we are doing precludes that . there was also mention of the fact that there is opposition from members of the jewish community . as my hon . friend consultation has been mentioned , and the secretary of state addressed many of those issues , but we have over the years carried out extensive consultation . we looked at around 50 possible sites in central london , and there was a public inquiry as part of the planning process . we conducted a very thorough search of possible alternative suitable sites . all sites were assessed against the same published criteria , which included visibility , accessibility , availability and affordability . almost all the criteria in the 2015 site selection document can be met at victoria tower gardens . i thank members across the house for their contributions in this important debate and for their support to deliver this long - overdue memorial . i am not going to continue with the reasoned amendment on obvious grounds , which i spoke about earlier . i beg to ask leave to withdraw the amendment . amendment , by leave , withdrawn . main question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read a second time . king ’s recommendation signified . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that , for the purposes of any act resulting from the holocaust memorial bill , it is expedient to authorise the payment out of money provided by parliament of any expenditure incurred under or by virtue of the act by the secretary of state.—(ruth edwards . ) ordered , that in respect of — ( 1 ) the motions in the name of secretary michael gove relating to ( a ) the holocaust memorial bill , and ( b ) positions for which additional salaries are payable for the purposes of section 4a(2 ) of the parliamentary standards act 2009 , the speaker shall put the questions necessary to dispose of proceedings not later than one and a half hours after the commencement of proceedings on the motion for this order ( notwithstanding the provisions of ( 2 ) the motion in the name of penny mordaunt relating to proxy voting , the speaker shall put the questions necessary to dispose of proceedings on that motion not later than one hour after the commencement of proceedings on that motion ; such questions shall include the questions on any amendments selected by the speaker which may then be moved ; proceedings may continue , though opposed , after the moment of interruption ; and the four motions on the holocaust memorial bill will be debated together . amendments ( a ) and ( b ) tabled to motion 6 have been selected . i will invite sir peter bottomley to move the selected amendments at the end of the debate as we dispose of each motion in turn . the debate that now takes place may range over all four motions . i beg to move , ( 1 ) that the bill be committed to a select committee of five members , all of whom are to be nominated by the committee of selection . ( 2 ) that in determining the composition of the select committee the committee of selection shall nominate three members from the government and two members from opposition parties . ( 3 ) that there shall stand referred to the select committee — ( a ) any petition against the bill submitted to the private bill office during the period beginning at 10.00am on ( b ) any petition which has been submitted to the private bill office and in which the petitioners complain of — ( i ) any amendment as proposed in the filled - up bill , ( ii ) any amendment as proposed by the member in charge of the bill which , if the bill were a private bill , could not be made except upon petition for additional provision , or ( iii ) any matter which has arisen during the progress of the bill before the select committee , ( and references in this paragraph to the submission of a petition are to its submission electronically , by post or in person ) . ( 4 ) that if no such petition as is mentioned in sub - paragraph ( 3)(a ) above is presented , or if all such petitions are withdrawn before the meeting of the committee , the order for the committal of the bill to a select committee shall be discharged and the bill shall be committed to a public bill committee . ( 5 ) that , notwithstanding the practice of the house that appearances on petitions against an opposed private bill be required to be entered at the first meeting of the select committee on the bill , in the case of any such petitions as are mentioned in paragraph 3(a ) above on which appearances are not entered at that meeting , the select committee shall appoint a later day or days on which it will require appearances on those petitions to be entered . ( 6 ) that any petitioner whose petition stands referred to the select committee shall , subject to the rules and orders of the house and to the prayer of that person ’s petition , be entitled to be heard in person or through counsel or agents upon that person ’s petition provided that it is prepared and signed in conformity with the rules and orders of the house , and the member in charge of the bill shall be entitled to be heard through counsel or agents in favour of the bill against that petition . ( 7 ) that the select committee shall require any hearing in relation to a petition mentioned in paragraph 6 above to take place in person , unless exceptional circumstances apply . ( 8) that in applying the rules of the house in relation to parliamentary agents , any reference to a petitioner in person shall be treated as including a reference to a duly authorised member or officer of an organisation , group or body . ( 9 ) that the select committee have power to sit notwithstanding any adjournment of the house and to report from day to day the minutes of evidence taken before it . ( 10 ) that three be the quorum of the select committee . with this , we shall discuss the following : motion 6 — holocaust memorial bill : instruction — that it be an instruction to the select committee to which the holocaust memorial bill is committed to deal with the bill as follows : ( 1 ) that the committee treats the principle of the bill , as determined by the house on the bill ’s second reading , as comprising the matters mentioned in paragraph 2 ; and those matters shall accordingly not be at issue during proceedings of the committee . ( 2 ) the matters referred to in paragraph ( 1 ) are — ( a ) the secretary of state may incur expenditure for or in connection with ( i ) a memorial commemorating the victims of the holocaust , and ( ii ) a centre for learning relating to the memorial ; and ( b ) section 8(1 ) and ( 8) of the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 are not to prevent , restrict or otherwise affect the construction , use , operation , maintenance or improvement of such a memorial and centre for learning at victoria tower gardens in the city of westminster . ( 3 ) given paragraph ( 2 ) and as the bill does not remove the need for planning permission and all other necessary consents being obtained in the usual way for the construction , use , operation , maintenance and improvement of the memorial and centre for learning , the committee shall not hear any petition against the bill to the extent that the petition relates to — ( a ) the question of whether or not there should be a memorial commemorating the victims of the holocaust or a centre for learning relating to the memorial , whether at victoria tower gardens or elsewhere ; or ( b ) whether or not planning permission and all other necessary consents should be given for the memorial and centre for learning , or the terms and conditions on which they should be given . ( 4 ) the committee shall have power to consider any amendments proposed by the member in charge of the bill which , if the bill were a private bill , could not be made except upon petition for additional provision . ( 5 ) paragraph ( 4 ) applies only so far as the amendments proposed by the member in charge of the bill fall within the principle of the bill as provided for by paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) above . that these orders be standing orders of the house . amendment ( a ) to motion 6 , in paragraph ( 2)(a ) , leave out from “ memorial ” to the end of paragraph ( 2)(b ) . amendment ( b ) , to motion 6 , leave out paragraph ( 3 ) . motion 7 — holocaust memorial bill : carry - over — that the following provisions shall apply in respect of the holocaust memorial bill : suspension at end of current session ( 1 ) further proceedings on the bill shall be suspended from the day on which this session of parliament ends ( “ the current session ” ) until the next session of parliament ( “ session 2023–24 ” ) . ( 2 ) if a bill is presented in session 2023–24 in the same terms as those in which the bill stood when proceedings on it were suspended in the current session — ( a ) the bill so presented shall be ordered to be printed and shall be deemed to have been read the first and second time ; ( b ) the standing orders and practice of the house applicable to the bill , so far as complied with or dispensed with in the current session , shall be deemed to have been complied with or ( as the case may be ) dispensed with in session 2023–24 ; ( c ) the bill shall be dealt with in accordance with — ( i ) paragraph 3 , if proceedings in select committee were not completed when proceedings on the bill were suspended , ( ii ) paragraph 4 , if proceedings in public bill committee were begun but not completed when proceedings on the bill were suspended , ( iii ) paragraph 5 , if the bill was waiting to be considered when proceedings on it were suspended , ( iv ) paragraph 6 , if the bill was waiting for third reading when proceedings on it were suspended , or ( v ) paragraph 7 , if the bill has been read the third time and sent to the house of lords . ( 3 ) if this paragraph applies — ( a ) the bill shall stand committed to a select committee of such members as were members of the committee when proceedings on the bill were suspended in the current session ; ( b ) any instruction of the house to the committee in the current session shall be an instruction to the committee on the bill in session 2023–24 ; ( c ) all petitions submitted in the current session which stand referred to the committee and which have not been withdrawn , and any petition submitted between the day on which the current session ends and the day on which proceedings on the bill are resumed in session 2023–24 in accordance with this order , shall stand referred to the committee in session 2023–24 ; ( d ) any minutes of evidence taken and any papers laid before the committee in the current session shall stand referred to the committee in session 2023–24 ; ( e ) only those petitions mentioned in sub - paragraph ( c ) , and any petition which may be submitted to the private bill office and in which the petitioners complain of any amendment proposed by the member in charge of the bill which , if the bill were a private bill , could not be made except upon petition for additional provision or of any matter which has arisen during the progress of the bill before the committee in session 2023–24 , shall stand referred to the committee ; ( f ) any petitioners whose petitions stand referred to the committee in session 2023–24 shall , subject to the rules and orders of the house , and to the prayer of that person ’s petition , be entitled to be heard in person or through counsel or agents upon that person ’s petition provided that it is prepared and signed in conformity with the rules and orders of the house , and the member in charge of the bill shall be entitled to be heard through counsel or agents in favour of the bill against that petition ; ( g ) the committee shall require any hearing in relation to a petition mentioned in sub - paragraph ( f ) above to take place in person , unless exceptional circumstances apply ; ( h ) in applying the rules of the house in relation to parliamentary agents , any reference to a petitioner in person shall be treated as including a reference to a duly authorised member or officer of an organisation , group or body ; ( i ) the committee shall have power to sit notwithstanding any adjournment of the house and to report from day to day minutes of evidence taken before it ; ( j ) three shall be the quorum of the committee . ( 4 ) if this paragraph applies , the bill shall be deemed to have been reported from the select committee and to have been re - committed to a public bill committee . ( 5 ) if this paragraph applies — ( a ) the bill shall be deemed to have been reported from the select committee and from the public bill committee , and ( b ) the bill shall be set down as an order of the day for consideration . ( 6)if this paragraph applies — ( a ) the bill shall be deemed to have been reported from the select committee and from the public bill committee and to have been considered , and ( b ) the bill shall be set down as an order of the day for third reading . ( 7 ) if this paragraph applies , the bill shall be deemed to have passed through all its stages in this house . other ( 8) in paragraph ( 3 ) above , references to the submission of a petition are to its submission electronically , by post or in person . that these orders be standing orders of the house . motion 8 — positions for which additional salaries are payable for the purposes of section 4a(2 ) of the parliamentary standards act 2009 — that the order of the house of the instruction motion , tabled in the name of the secretary of state , sets out the matters that can properly be considered by the select committee when it hears petitions against the bill . it is a custom of the house , and a well - established part of the process for hybrid bills , that the select committee should not hear petitions that seek to challenge the principle of the bill . the second reading debate that just concluded was the opportunity for this house to consider the principle of the bill , and i am delighted that this house has given such support to the bill . it is familiar practice on hybrid bills , for example with the current and recent high speed 2 bills , that the house should pass a motion giving instructions to the select committee on what precisely falls within the principle of the bill . such a motion helps to provide clarity for the committee and , of course , for potential petitioners , so that no time should be wasted seeking to raise matters on the bill ’s principle , on which the house has already expressed such a clear view . in this case , the motion specifies that “ the committee shall not hear any petition against the bill to the extent that the petition relates to — ( a ) the question of whether or not there should be a memorial commemorating the victims of the holocaust or a centre for learning relating to the memorial , whether at victoria tower gardens or elsewhere ; or ( b ) whether or not planning permission and all other necessary consents should be given for the memorial and centre for learning , or the terms and conditions on which they should be given . ” if the house agrees to pass the motion , the select committee would still have a good deal of scope to consider matters relating to clause 2 of the bill — notably , the extent to which the restrictions in section 8 of the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 should be removed , and whether there should be any conditions on that removal . it is accepted that there is a principle to memorial , so what about my point on having an overground memorial — like other memorials — but not an underground learning centre ? will the committee still be able to consider such a detail ? the committee can consider the extent and any conditions on the memorial in victoria tower gardens , so yes , that can be considered . the established practice for select committees on hybrid bills is that they consider petitions from people who are directly and especially affected by the proposals in the bill . i understand that the house authorities will publish guidance for people who are considering whether to petition against the bill . it will ultimately be a matter for the select committee to decide which petitioners to hear and which points in the petitions to consider . the motion is a necessary and important measure that supports the well - established principles and processes for dealing with a hybrid bill . the amendments proposed by the father of the house , my hon . friend i call the father of the house . i am grateful to my hon . friend the minister for the way in which she has introduced these four topics . we are talking mainly about the instruction motion ; i do not think that the others are very exceptionable . i think i may have served on more hybrid bill committees — and certainly for longer — than most people , including that of high speed 2 . i doubt that the situation is quite as my hon . friend described it . hybrid bill procedure exists for a reason : to protect the rights of those who are specifically affected by a bill and allow them to put their case to a committee . by making clause 2 the principle of the bill , as well as clause 1 — as i said before , there is no controversy about clause 1 — the government have already spent £ 17 million or more achieving nothing . they are now proposing to spend an extra £ 80 million to £ 100 million achieving not very much . i suggested in a previous debate that the government should consider how to get a national holocaust memorial up — close to westminster , if they want — within two years . of course , the government would not , as i have explained before , achieve it in four to five years extra , over and above the eight years that have been used up so far . to go back to the hybridity , it is a matter of record that the government declared in front of the examiners that this was not a hybrid bill . they were wrong ; it is a hybrid bill . the reason for a hybrid bill is so that people have the right to petition . the government tried to stop that . i think that it is fairly clear to anyone who looks at this that the government are now seeking to achieve the same result by using this instruction . it is up to the government to decide whether the instruction , as introduced , is an abuse . it would be quite easy for the government to stand up and say what things the petitioners might rightfully put in a petition and be heard on , rather than telling the committee that they can not be heard . in addition , because this is a local park for local people , i believe not just that advertisements should be put in newspapers or in the gazette , but that a leaflet should be given to every resident , no matter how small or large their home , from , say , vauxhall bridge , victoria station , along victoria street and south of victoria street up to the embankment . those people should be told how the procedure works , how they can petition , what they can petition on and how they can be represented together by a common agent , if they want to be . that is what happened in my experience on hs2 . the instruction , as described by the minister , would make the whole bill part of the principle of the bill . that is not common . in fact , i do not know of it happening before . the whole of the bill can not be made the principle , because that then makes it impossible for the petitioners to have their cases heard effectively . so i think we need to accept that the petitioners will be heard on nearly everything that is not an abuse . if someone says , “ i do not want any money spent on it , ” i can understand not allowing that . that is the principle , but the rest of it , i argue , is not . paragraph ( 3)(a ) of motion 6 refers to a petition that relates to “ the question of whether or not there should be a memorial commemorating the victims of the holocaust or a centre for learning relating to the memorial , whether at victoria tower gardens or elsewhere ” . i ask this explicitly : can either the secretary of state or the minister stand up and tell me now that , if someone wants to argue in front of the committee that it would be better to have the basement box somewhere else and just have the memorial , would that petition potentially be heard by the committee ? i think it would be a matter for the committee . i agree with the secretary of state that it would be a matter for the committee , but it is a matter for the committee under the instructions . by the way , if it helps those who are concerned about votes and trains , i intend to vote for both amendments , but force a division only on one of them . i am trying to make sure that these issues will be considered in the house during the bill ’s remaining stages and in the house of lords as well , where i suspect there will be a degree of scrutiny . this hybrid procedure gives ordinary people a chance to have their voices heard , and it allows the committee to insert conditions when the bill comes back to the house . those conditions , i believe , could include — i am not going to tell the committee what it has to do , although i volunteer to be a member if anyone wants to put me on it — saying that the government should , before this bill comes back for its further stages on the floor of the house , show the alternatives to the present plans . i do not think we should rely on the planning inspector , whose conditions were rather odd before , or on the secretary of state ’s colleague making an independent decision on the secretary of state ’s application . i think that may formally be an acceptable procedure , but it is not one that anyone would justify if we were giving a lecture on democracy in another country . i believe that the committee should have the capacity or ability to hear petitions that say , “ if the government say that the memorial only takes up 7.5 % of the land in victoria tower gardens , that should be written in as a condition in the bill . ” i believe , notwithstanding the acceptability of paragraph ( 2)(a ) about the money , that the committee should be able to say that the house can consider the bill on the condition that the total cost is not more than another £ 80 million , if we go ahead with the box , or preferably £ 20 million without the box , whether at the north end of victoria tower gardens , or parliament square , or whitehall , or college green . there are a whole series of other things i could say — i have a long , detailed speech and i apologise to those who helped me create the arguments — but i think the house will find it convenient if i leave it with this point . this hybrid bill must be considered properly by the hybrid committee , which should allow petitions to be heard . local people will put their points of view forward . if some duplicate each other , hear them together , but do not exclude any point of practice or of principle if we want to get a holocaust memorial in the next two years . we will not with this process . it needs conditions to change it . we will not even , in my view , get it within the next four or five years at £ 120 million , unless the government wake up to the fact that this is sticking in a big box that does not do what the original plans wanted in a place where it is not appropriate . we can do better than that , and i ask the secretary of state to recognise that that is the point of moving these amendments . i ask the house not to restrict the petitioners . the government have now accepted that this is a hybrid bill , so use the procedures properly and be democratic . i rise in support of the father of the house ’s amendments for several reasons . no one is doubting , as i think we have all made clear in this debate , the need for a holocaust memorial . it is absolutely essential , so that we never forget the horror of the genocide and the holocaust , and a memorial would serve that purpose . my central concern is a twofold absence , the first of which is the absence of a proper consultation as to the memorial ’s location . there was a consultation , which went through the normal planning procedure of westminster city council , but we will remember perhaps that the secretary of state called it in . since then , there seems to have been a process — almost a locomotive in action — that is determined that the following of a proper process is secondary to the decision that has already been made to site the memorial in victoria tower gardens . proper process has been sadly lacking . after all , we are only having this debate because those pushing for the siting of the memorial in victoria tower gardens were informed by a high court judge that they could not ride roughshod over an act of parliament that said that victoria tower gardens should be preserved for permanent use as a public park . we should not forget that . rose — will my hon . friend give way ? the father of the house caught my eye first . my hon . friend has reminded me that the government now say that admission to the memorial will be free in perpetuity . the same words—“in perpetuity”—are used in the london act that protects the park from this kind of building . who do we trust ? i agree with the father of the house : we are dealing with serious issues of trust here , and the public trusting what we say in this place . my hon . friend said that he was going to speak in support of the father of the house ’s amendments , but i am afraid that the points he is making belong to the debate that we had on second reading about the principles behind the bill . it is quite wrong for him to try to return to the arguments that we made earlier this afternoon , when there was strong support from both sides of the house for passing the bill . i disagree . if my right hon . friend reads the amendments , they talk about the bill removing “ the need for planning permission and all other necessary consents being obtained in the usual way for the construction , use , operation ” and “ maintenance ” of the memorial . this is all part and parcel of the due process that has been sadly lacking in this whole endeavour for the government to get their way in siting the memorial in victoria tower gardens , come what may . it is very apt to say that a decision has been made at the centre . it has taken far too long , by the way — we can all agree with that ; this process started in 2015 , and here we are in 2023 still debating it — but the fact is that due process has not been followed . there has been a lack of transparency , to the point where a high court judge has to say that we need to debate this matter in parliament before those pushing for the siting of the memorial in victoria tower gardens can have their way . we should be worried about that . as i said at the beginning of my speech , i think we all very much support the establishment of a national holocaust memorial . nobody dissents from that : it is about the way in which the process has been conducted , with a lack of transparency and a lack of due process . i almost think that there has been some sort of deviousness in getting us to this point . will my hon . friend join me in paying tribute to all those who are part of the save victoria tower gardens campaign — all of them local people who are so desperate to ensure that this vital piece of public park remains so ? does he agree that it is so important to hear their voices continually throughout this bill process ? i agree with my hon . friend . that is why , coming back to the intervention from my right hon . friend i just want to address a few of the points that have been made . i clarify the fact that it is a matter for the committee , ultimately , which petitioners to hear and which points to consider . this is a direction to the committee , but , ultimately , especially in some of the examples , it would be for the committee to decide . on whether to decide to set conditions — for instance , on the area of the garden — that would be within the remit of the committee . there was a discussion as to whether clause 2 was within the principle of the bill . we have to remember that this is a bill with only three clauses , one of which is about the extent of the bill , so i would strongly argue that clause 1 and clause 2 are the principles of the bill . in my mind , that is clear . there was a concern raised that the planning decision would be made by a minister in the department for levelling up , housing and communities . i want to reassure the house that we have the strictest processes in place to divide the decision - making principles , so no minister involved in the holocaust memorial bill will in any way be involved in the planning decision . to use the banking term , there will be the strictest of chinese walls . i want to reassure the house that we have done the consultation , as the secretary of state and i have set out , and that we are launching a very transparent process . however , the purpose of the committee is not to re - debate the principles in clauses 1 and 2 ; it is to discuss conditions and extent . i commend the motion to the house . question put and agreed to . motion made , and question proposed , that it be an instruction to the select committee to which the holocaust memorial bill is committed to deal with the bill as follows : ( 1 ) that the committee treats the principle of the bill , as determined by the house on the bill ’s second reading , as comprising the matters mentioned in paragraph 2 ; and those matters shall accordingly not be at issue during proceedings of the committee . ( 2 ) the matters referred to in paragraph ( 1 ) are — ( a ) the secretary of state may incur expenditure for or in connection with ( i ) a memorial commemorating the victims of the holocaust , and ( ii ) a centre for learning relating to the memorial ; and ( b ) section 8(1 ) and ( 8) of the london county council ( improvements ) act 1900 are not to prevent , restrict or otherwise affect the construction , use , operation , maintenance or improvement of such a memorial and centre for learning at victoria tower gardens in the city of westminster . ( 3 ) given paragraph ( 2 ) and as the bill does not remove the need for planning permission and all other necessary consents being obtained in the usual way for the construction , use , operation , maintenance and improvement of the memorial and centre for learning , the committee shall not hear any petition against the bill to the extent that the petition relates to — ( a ) the question of whether or not there should be a memorial commemorating the victims of the holocaust or a centre for learning relating to the memorial , whether at victoria tower gardens or elsewhere ; or ( b ) whether or not planning permission and all other necessary consents should be given for the memorial and centre for learning , or the terms and conditions on which they should be given . ( 4 ) the committee shall have power to consider any amendments proposed by the member in charge of the bill which , if the bill were a private bill , could not be made except upon petition for additional provision . ( 5 ) paragraph ( 4 ) applies only so far as the amendments proposed by the member in charge of the bill fall within the principle of the bill as provided for by paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) above . that these orders be standing orders of the house.—(felicity buchan . ) amendment proposed : ( a ) , to leave out from “ memorial ” in paragraph ( 2)(a ) to the end of paragraph ( 2)(b).—(sir peter bottomley . ) question put , that the amendment be made . the house divided : ayes 11 , noes 379 . question accordingly negatived . amendment proposed to motion 6 : ( b ) , leave out paragraph ( 3).—(sir peter bottomley . ) question put , that the amendment be made . question negatived . main question put and agreed to . ordered , that the following provisions shall apply in respect of the holocaust memorial bill : suspension at end of current session ( 1 ) further proceedings on the bill shall be suspended from the day on which this session of parliament ends ( “ the current session ” ) until the next session of parliament ( “ session 2023–24 ” ) . ( 2 ) if a bill is presented in session 2023–24 in the same terms as those in which the bill stood when proceedings on it were suspended in the current session — ( a ) the bill so presented shall be ordered to be printed and shall be deemed to have been read the first and second time ; ( b ) the standing orders and practice of the house applicable to the bill , so far as complied with or dispensed with in the current session , shall be deemed to have been complied with or ( as the case may be ) dispensed with in session 2023–24 ; ( c ) the bill shall be dealt with in accordance with — ( i ) paragraph 3 , if proceedings in select committee were not completed when proceedings on the bill were suspended , ( ii ) paragraph 4 , if proceedings in public bill committee were begun but not completed when proceedings on the bill were suspended , ( iii ) paragraph 5 , if the bill was waiting to be considered when proceedings on it were suspended , ( iv ) paragraph 6 , if the bill was waiting for third reading when proceedings on it were suspended , or ( v ) paragraph 7 , if the bill has been read the third time and sent to the house of lords . ( 3 ) if this paragraph applies — ( a ) the bill shall stand committed to a select committee of such members as were members of the committee when proceedings on the bill were suspended in the current session ; ( b ) any instruction of the house to the committee in the current session shall be an instruction to the committee on the bill in session 2023–24 ; ( c ) all petitions submitted in the current session which stand referred to the committee and which have not been withdrawn , and any petition submitted between the day on which the current session ends and the day on which proceedings on the bill are resumed in session 2023–24 in accordance with this order , shall stand referred to the committee in session 2023–24 ; ( d ) any minutes of evidence taken and any papers laid before the committee in the current session shall stand referred to the committee in session 2023–24 ; ( e ) only those petitions mentioned in sub - paragraph ( c ) , and any petition which may be submitted to the private bill office and in which the petitioners complain of any amendment proposed by the member in charge of the bill which , if the bill were a privatebill , could not be made except upon petition for additional provision or of any matter which has arisen during the progress of the bill before the committee in session 2023–24 , shall stand referred to the committee ; ( f ) any petitioners whose petitions stand referred to the committee in session 2023–24 shall , subject to the rules and orders of the house , and to the prayer of that person ’s petition , be entitled to be heard in person or through counsel or agents upon that person ’s petition provided that it is prepared and signed in conformity with the rules and orders of the house , and the member in charge of the bill shall be entitled to be heard through counsel or agents in favour of the bill against that petition ; ( g ) the committee shall require any hearing in relation to a petition mentioned in sub - paragraph ( f ) above to take place in person , unless exceptional circumstances apply ; ( h ) in applying the rules of the house in relation to parliamentary agents , any reference to a petitioner in person shall be treated as including a reference to a duly authorised member or officer of an organisation , group or body ; ( i ) the committee shall have power to sit notwithstanding any adjournment of the house and to report from day to day minutes of evidence taken before it ; ( j ) three shall be the quorum of the committee . ( 4 ) if this paragraph applies , the bill shall be deemed to have been reported from the select committee and to have been re - committed to a public bill committee . ( 5 ) if this paragraph applies — ( a ) the bill shall be deemed to have been reported from the select committee and from the public bill committee , and ( b ) the bill shall be set down as an order of the day for consideration . ( 6)if this paragraph applies — ( a ) the bill shall be deemed to have been reported from the select committee and from the public bill committee and to have been considered , and ( b ) the bill shall be set down as an order of the day for third reading . ( 7 ) if this paragraph applies , the bill shall be deemed to have passed through all its stages in this house . other ( 8) in paragraph ( 3 ) above , references to the submission of a petition are to its submission electronically , by post or in person . that these orders be standing orders of the house.—(felicity buchan . ) ordered , that the order of the house of motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft double taxation relief and international tax enforcement ( brazil ) order 2023 , which was laid before this house on that the draft double taxation relief and international tax enforcement ( san marino ) order 2023 , which was laid before this house on question agreed to . [ relevant documents : third report of the procedure committee , proxy voting : review of illness and injury pilot , hc 807 , and the government response , hc 1325 ; correspondence from the procedure committee to the leader of the house , on the proxy voting : review of illness and injury pilot , reported to the house on i beg to move , that — ( 1 ) this house ( a ) notes the third report from the procedure committee , on proxy voting : review of illness and injury pilot ( hc 807 ) , and , subject to paragraph ( 2 ) of this motion , approves the recommendations relating to extending the scheme on an ongoing basis and absences from the parliamentary estate in paragraphs 6 , 7 , 18 and 19 of that report . ( b ) endorses the proposals relating to the evidence required to obtain a proxy vote and the duration of such a vote set out in the letter dated ( 2 ) the amendment to order . will those leaving please do so quietly so that we can hear the leader of the house ? thank you , madam deputy speaker . following a successful pilot scheme and considered review by the procedure committee , the house is asked to approve a change to the standing orders to extend proxy voting to members suffering long - term illness or injury until the end of this parliament . the house is also asked to endorse further recommendations from the procedure committee to ensure that appropriate and suitably robust arrangements are put in place for members who wish to apply for a proxy vote . it recommends that members who avail themselves of the proxy voting system for reasons of long - term illness or injury must provide a certificate from a hospital consultant , and that any such proxy vote can be held for a maximum duration of seven months , with the possibility of further extension if recommended by both the consultant and the parliamentary health and wellbeing service . to give time for mr speaker to amend the scheme and for any affected members to gather the necessary paperwork , the changes — if agreed — will take effect from the government want to support a more inclusive culture and working environment in parliament , and welcome the procedure committee ’s conclusion that the pilot has been a success . i am grateful to all committee members and its chair , my right hon . friend changes to the rules governing this house must be introduced with care . extending the scheme to the end of this parliament , rather than in perpetuity , will allow the house to consider and monitor its operation and consider any changes . i hope that the measures carry the support of members . i thank colleagues for all the work done on the scheme , and i commend the motion to the house . i thank the leader of the house for bringing forward this important motion . i join her in thanking the chair of the procedure committee , her colleagues and the committee staff for all of their hard work on proxy voting over many months . they have handled the issue sensitively and thoroughly . i support the motion before us in the name of the leader of the house . i have spoken before about the importance of members being able to fulfil their core duty to vote on behalf of the people they represent even if they have a serious long - term condition or injury that prevents them from coming to the estate . it is right that colleagues who are suffering are able to recover properly in their own home . i pay tribute to it is right that we make this change for colleagues who might otherwise have dragged themselves into parliament — as we have all known someone do — when it was probably unwise , or who have stayed at home because they had to and felt terrible about it . the process that we are debating aims to fix that . the committee ’s report notes that the pilot scheme , which extended the eligibility for proxy voting , has enabled several members to vote who would otherwise have been unable to do so . i am glad that they were able to continue representing their constituents in that way . it is welcome progress , and i support the extension of the scheme . the committee has carefully considered the principle of absence from the estate in eligibility for a proxy vote . that has been an essential element of the rationale for proxy voting in general since its introduction in 2019 . there has been some deliberation on removing that principle from the standing orders . the intention is that members who are well enough to come in and participate in some of the day ’s parliamentary proceedings can do so , and will not then be ineligible for a proxy vote if they can not stay until a late vote or are not physically well enough to participate in a busy voting lobby . the committee has issued welcome clarification stating that it should not become commonplace , and i agree . it has provided a helpful example of an mp who may be well enough to come in for an urgent question of particular relevance to their constituency , but then needs to go home . it seems that the committee has worked through the issue and struck the right balance . i wish to put it on the record that , for some , proxy voting is not suitable , and there are other ways of managing absence . i was reassured to see that there are no proposed changes to the mechanisms that exist as political arrangements between the whips ’ offices . that also covers concerns about privacy that some have raised . that is important . where they wish to do so , members should — and under the proposed arrangement , still can — choose a more discreet pairing option or be nodded through . i can attest to the value of that option , as i used it in my first year here when i had a serious illness , and i am glad that it remains . parliament ought to be a model workplace , at the forefront of rights at work and accessibility , but it is also , crucially and exclusively , the centre of our democracy and a representation of that principle . i believe that the motion strikes the right balance between those principles and the unique requirements of an mp . it is proportionate and welcome , and i am glad to support it today . i am of the view that what can not be said in five minutes is probably is not worth saying at all , so i will be brief , but it is incumbent on me to speak on behalf of the chair of the procedure committee , my right hon . friend we know that proxy voting is a formal arrangement that allows members who are absent on baby leave to have another member register a vote on their behalf , but there have been repeated calls to review the process , and rightly so . following the procedure committee report on the extension of eligibility for proxy voting to include serious long - term illness and injury , the house agreed to a pilot scheme , which ran earlier this year . it was successful , and the committee was directed to review the operation of the pilot and make a report , which we have done . since then , as we know , the government have tabled the motion to give effect to some of the recommendations made by the committee in its report and in its subsequent letter to the leader of the house in june . if i can , i will make the key proposals completely clear . first , the procedure committee recommended that the house extend eligibility for proxy voting to include serious long - term illness and injury on an ongoing basis . if passed , this motion will have effect until the end of this parliament , but it is subject to wider review . the new arrangements will require a note from a hospital consultant , rather than a gp . that is because we think that resetting the expectation at a level where a member has required hospital care or is under the care of a consultant is about right . occupational health will now play a role in the initial review of notes provided , seeking further information if necessary . that is important because mr speaker is ultimately responsible for making the call , and he needs assurance from a professional body to do that . a proxy vote for illness or injury will be allowed for a maximum of seven months , although it can be extended in certain circumstances and certification will remain with the speaker . i think what we are discussing today is reasonably clear , and i am happy to support the motion . the pilot has been useful and i am pleased to have been part of it as a member of the procedure committee . in recent months , members have been able to exercise their vote when they might not otherwise have had the opportunity to do so , so it is a positive thing . the proposals bring this place into line with human resources arrangements in other locations . we are a modern employer ; we have to be a modern employer and we have to befit the role a modern employer plays . the proposals also allow discretion and privacy , which are important . the ability to register a proxy vote enables those who have a good medical reason not to come on to the estate to maintain their privacy and keep that reason from becoming more widely known . this is about doing the right thing as a good employer , and of course it is subject to review . i thank the leader of the house for moving the motion this evening . we in the snp support the recommendations made in the procedure committee ’s report and in its subsequent letter to the leader of the house . we thank the members of the committee for their efforts . proxy voting works . we saw that with the measures put in place during the pandemic and with the current pilot for members suffering from injury or long - term ill health . it has enabled several members to fulfil their responsibility to vote in divisions when they would otherwise have been unable to do so . i , too , pay special tribute to my hon . friend proxy voting is a simple , common - sense and reasonable adjustment that allows members to fulfil their obligations to their constituents without putting their health at risk . it is about ensuring equality and inclusivity for elected members , and enabling them to do their jobs . the introduction of this reform on a permanent basis is long overdue , but very welcome . i thank the leader of the house for moving the motion and for accepting the recommendations of the procedure committee , of which i am pleased to be a member . the idea of extending proxy voting further was not entirely without controversy . some people were very concerned about it — understandably , given that we are meant to be a parliament where people gather and exchange views , and our voting system is designed to ensure that members vote in person rather than via a proxy . our task was to consider whether we should allow a proxy vote for members who were suffering from a long - term illness or a serious injury ; it was not to take into account those who had a short - term illness or were travelling on parliamentary business , or who felt that this was an adaptation they needed in the long term for career reasons . i think it fair to say that the trial was a success , but i also think there was evidence that some people were securing proxies in circumstances that were not envisaged in the creation of a scheme for those with serious long - term illnesses . we had always intended this to be a temporary measure allowing those who could not attend parliament because they were too ill to have their voices heard at least in the voting lobbies . the expectation was that at some point , they would come back and vote in the normal way . personally , i would be sympathetic to allowing a proxy vote as a long - term adaptation for someone who was not fit to be here for the whole day , which i think is reasonable , but that is not what the committee was tasked to do , and it would have to be the subject of further work if the house so wished . there are some tweaks in the report . the requirement to produce a letter from any medical professional has been changed to a requirement to produce a letter from a consultant , to emphasise our expectation that a proxy vote would be used in the event of a serious illness probably involving hospital care . there is now the expectation of a seven - month time limit , intended to be in line with the arrangements for statutory sick pay , so we are not trying to make arrangements for members that are different from those in the real world . this is meant to be a temporary situation from which members will eventually emerge . the insertion of the reference to an occupational health review was an attempt to help mr speaker , with his discretion , to work out whether an application was actually related to a serious long - term illness . if members want the scheme to be a success and to be a permanent feature , i urge them not to apply for it on the grounds of a short - term illness or to extend maternity leave . they should not be speaking regularly in the chamber and voting by proxy unless there is a very exceptional circumstance . they should not be at drinks dos on the parliamentary estate and voting by proxy . that is not what the scheme is intended for . it is intended for members who are too ill to be here . we considered whether there could be a very prescriptive scheme , with a list of conditions that were serious enough to be covered , but we worked out pretty quickly that we would probably be coming back here every few weeks to add a new condition that we had missed , which would leave mr speaker far too fettered in his discretion . we also accepted the persuasive evidence we heard that a member in the final stages of recovery from an illness might be able to come back to work part time but might not be able to be here for a long night of voting into the early hours , and that there was clearly merit in the speaker ’s having discretion to enable the member to speak in the chamber without having to be here for hours when they were not fit to be . the shadow leader of the house talked about the principle of a proxy vote being available only to those who are generally not on the parliamentary estate , but , as she noted , we did not include that as an absolute rule . if there is an emergency in a member ’s constituency , the member may want to break their leave and speak about it , but generally members will be absent and will not be here for the whole day , or the whole week , or the whole month . that is the balance we were trying to strike . we were trying to find a way to enable mr speaker to use his discretion to ensure that the scheme was not being abused , and to ensure that , generally , members who are fit to be here should be voting in person , while those who are not fit to be here can vote by proxy . that is what we were trying to achieve , and i urge members who make applications to stick to the spirit of it . i suspect we will have another review by the end of the parliament so that we can see whether proxy voting should become a permanent fixture after the next election . i certainly hope that when we get the next review , we will see that the people who are using proxy voting have been sticking to the spirit and the intention of it , and that that will enable it to become a permanent feature . i very much support the motion and , as a member of the procedure committee , have been involved in some of the discussions of it . one of the most important elements is that the amendment to the standing order is made only for the duration of this parliament . my concern , which i expressed during the committee ’s discussions , is that it is fine when we have a government with a large working majority — people will not be too fussed about issues such as whether somebody with a medical condition who is on the estate is also able to have a proxy vote — but if , after the next general election , the balance between the government and the opposition were much closer , or there were even a hung parliament , i can see that difficulties might arise and the members of the new parliament might want more rigour written into the standing order than i think there is in the current version . that is why it is important that the amendment is made only for the duration of this parliament . i hope that , during the rest of this parliament , there will be an attempt on both sides of the house to see whether we can introduce some rigour and consistency into the way in which people with medical conditions can access proxies and the circumstances in which they can not . the motion is also valuable because , by inference , it excludes any suggestion that people who are temporarily suspended from the house for conduct unbecoming should be able to creep back in through the proxy voting system . people who are absent from the house because of their own conduct , which is nothing to do with health or baby leave , should under no circumstances be able to exercise a proxy vote . the motion does not facilitate that ; i think , by inference , it excludes it . as i said in an earlier debate , if we allow people who are excluded from the estate because of conduct unbecoming to have proxy votes , that will contaminate the whole process . i am grateful to the leader of the house for not contaminating this amendment to the standing order . i again thank the procedure committee and all right hon . and hon . members who have worked with it to produce the proxy voting scheme . i hope that members will support the motion . i commend it to the house . question put and agreed to . [ relevant document : house of commons commission , external members of the house of commons commission : nomination of candidate , hc 1377 . ] i beg to move , that , in pursuance of section 1(2b ) of the house of commons ( administration ) act 1978 , as amended , catherine ward be appointed to the house of commons commission for a period of 18 months with immediate effect . i am sure that the whole house will want to join me in thanking louise wilson , who served as an external member on the house of commons commission from june 2021 to november 2022 . i wish her well in the future . the commission recommends that the house appoint catherine ward as an external member for an initial period of 18 months , with the possibility to extend for a further two years . i hope that the house will agree to her appointment today . i commend the motion to the house . i call the shadow leader of the house . i rise briefly to support the motion . as the overall supervisory body of the house of commons administration , the house of commons commission ’s agenda is jam - packed . it really does matter that we get these appointments right , and i believe that we have really got it right with catherine ’s appointment . we have a great deal of duties . we have been working hard on the introduction of a complex process to increase the safety of those on the estate , including risk - based exclusion . we have commissioned a review of the independent complaints and grievance scheme . we have important work to do , not just for how this place works but for how the public view us . given the importance of their work , it is important that external members of the house of commons commission are well tested , carefully selected and able to bring extensive relevant experience to the commission , and i can confirm that that is the case with this appointment . i was part of the thorough and fair recruitment process , which was led by a strong panel . catherine was found to be the best candidate , with an effective mix of skills and knowledge that is correct for the commission ’s work . with experience of being a non - executive director and a background in people management roles at board level , we believe she will bring a diverse range and depth of experience . i look forward to warmly welcoming catherine as an external member of the house of commons commission . i call the snp spokesperson . i offer my congratulations to catherine ward on her appointment , assuming she is confirmed tonight . i warmly welcome her to the role as an external member of the house of commons commission . her career background is tremendously impressive , with experience in the creative , education and healthcare sectors , among others . she has a wealth of knowledge and expertise acquired from a diverse range of roles , so i am confident she will bring a unique perspective to the commission . she also brings intimate knowledge of this place from her role as a non - executive director of human resources policy and the strategic support group at the house of commons , and i am sure the other commissioners are looking forward to working with her . question put and agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the following amendment to question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that — ( 1 ) ( a ) in paragraph ( 1 ) , insert “ and chair ” after “ members ” ; ( b ) in paragraph ( 2 ) , leave out “ eight ” and insert “ its chair and seven other ” ; and ( c ) in paragraph ( 4 ) , leave out “ the panel may elect its own chair . ” and insert “ if the position of chair of the panel becomes vacant , the panel may elect an interim chair for the period of vacancy , who shall be entitled to exercise all powers vested in a chair appointed in accordance with paragraph ( 1 ) of this order . ” ; ( 2 ) ( a ) in the title , leave out “ members ” and insert “ chair and members ” ; ( b ) in paragraph ( 1 ) , leave out “ members of the independent expert panel shall be appointed by a resolution of the house on a motion ” and insert “ the members of the independent expert panel shall be appointed by resolutions of the house on motions ” ; ( c ) at the end of paragraph ( 5 ) , insert “ a member of the panel may apply to be appointed to the position of chair for the remainder of their original period of appointment . ” ; and ( d ) after paragraph ( 7 ) , insert new paragraph as follows : “ ( ) in this order , the term “ member ” includes the chair of the panel , and provisions relating to period of appointment apply to the total length of service on the panel in any capacity . ”.—(penny mordaunt . ) question agreed to . motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(fay jones . ) i rise to address this government ’s preparedness for new covid-19 variants and other biological threats . based on past experience , it is fair to say i am yet to be convinced that this government are making the necessary progress in this regard . i will first address the government ’s culture before moving on to extant concerns specific to pandemic preparedness . hindsight is of value only if we are prepared to use the lessons it reveals to ensure that the same mistakes or misjudgments are not repeated . when it comes to calamity and loss , vindication brings only a bitter taste , not solace or comfort . for those of us in this place , and beyond , who voiced genuinely held concerns about the uk government ’s response to the pandemic , yesterday ’s evidence to the covid inquiry from the former health secretary is unlikely to elicit any sense of schadenfreude — just a deep sense of despair and sadness . the former health secretary ’s testimony does not reflect well on those experts who allegedly gave him deeply flawed advice but , ultimately , he accepted that he alone carried ministerial responsibility for the “ calamitous state of affairs ” not only in his department but in the agencies that reported to him , as secretary of state . in short , he admitted that , when courage called , he failed to execute the responsibilities of his office . he is , of course , correct , but his apology rings hollow and does nothing to ameliorate the damage caused . my abiding memory of the pandemic is the former health secretary ’s all - too - frequent glib responses from the dispatch box to questions intended to be helpful and constructive . i could devote further commentary to his shocking testimony , but i suggest that might be better served by a privileges committee inquiry or other serious investigation . the shutting down of dissenting voices was all too commonplace , and not just in this place . innova , the beneficiary of lucrative lateral flow test contracts , put pressure on the scotsman for daring to publish my valid criticism of the reliability of its tests . despite scrupulously evidencing my assertions , with the support of esteemed academics , the editorial team could not withstand the very deep pockets that innova had , on the back of billions of pounds of public money spent on its devices . in addition , pressure was applied to academic and clinical staff who raised concerns about the adequacy of the uk government ’s pandemic response . although i readily give my thanks to those staff for their ongoing encouragement and support , i am unable to name them , such is my concern that we are not yet out of the woods in terms of truth and reconciliation on these matters . that such a culture was allowed to flourish at a time of grave emergency is detestable . although it is clear that the uk government must change , i see few earnest attempts to do so . i have asked too many questions on these matters to count , and i have led and contributed to multiple debates in this chamber and in westminster hall , but much of that was for naught . concerns went ignored and commitments were readily discarded , even by those few souls who maintained a position during the ministerial churn from prime minister to prime minister to prime minister . this may seem tangential to the matter at hand , but government culture is central to organisational learning for future preparedness . in its basic form , the management of any infection is not rocket science , but each strand is necessarily interdependent and must be rigorous in both design and application . the continued failure to understand that fundamental relationship will fatally undermine any strategic future planning . in essence , robust surveillance and detection should lead to prompt isolation of the threat , followed by the administration of safe and effective treatments , and supported measures , with further screening and surveillance repeated until the threat is managed . get any step of that process wrong and the risk quickly spirals out of control . relying on detection and isolation alone will not work . as we know only too well , an over - reliance on vaccination in the absence of robust surveillance is , similarly , a fool ’s errand . a recent briefing from the house of commons library set out the ambitions of the uk health security agency and its centre for pandemic preparedness . the cpp aims to ensure the uk ’s future pandemic responses are effective and efficient , and that they reduce the negative impacts of health threats . the ccp aims to become the world - leading hub for all aspects of pandemic preparedness . in addition , the briefing notes that the hsa is working in partnership with the united states centres for disease control and prevention to turbocharge efforts to combat global pandemics and emerging health threats . those are grand claims , grandiose perhaps , but the question remains : what does this mean in the practice of disease management and control ? in my adjournment debate on the uk diagnostics industry in may last year , i voiced my concerns about the uk ’s lack of preparedness for a future pandemic strategy , whereas economies the world over were developing 10 - year strategies for the same . i applaud the efforts of the hsa in conceptualising a detailed report and a tentative timeline to execute a 10 - year science strategy . it emphasises transforming surveillance through genomic identification and characterisation of new covid-19 variants , and promoting the use of innovative diagnostics , which are promising steps in the direction i indicated last year . however , there are still clamant concerns to be addressed on the implementation of this plan and the efficacy of the hsa as an institution to deliver on those ambitions . first , the partnerships section on page 31 of the strategy report that a “ 10 - year strategic collaboration with moderna will ensure we are better prepared against future pandemic threats , including through an onshore mrna innovation and technology centre . ” what is the basis of this “ focused partnership ” between the hsa and this single specific pharmaceutical company and a single specific vaccine technology ? recalling the valneva vaccine production debacle and the adverse impact it had on the scottish based company , may i ask what the rationale is behind such a partnership , as opposed to a more diffuse and cost - effective approach ? during a westminster hall debate in january 2022 i raised concerns about the uk government ’s overemphasis on vaccination as the sole plank of their policy , noting that even with the vaccine success delivered by dame kate bingham , they had placed all their eggs in the mrna basket . that was , and still is , short - sighted . the valneva vaccine was the only adjuvanted , inactivated , whole - virus vaccine technology , yet the uk government pulled the contract just before the phase 3 results were published . they demonstrated that the vaccine was highly effective and safe . that makes it abundantly clear that scotland does have the potential to lead the way for the world in the domain of innovation and vaccine strategy for pandemic preparedness , yet we are continually and systematically impeded by the uk government in that ambition . i congratulate the hon . gentleman on his persistence in trying to hold the government to account on this subject . he refers to the culture , particularly in the department of health and social care , of keeping things to themselves , playing cards close to their chest , not having regulatory impact assessments and , in effect , as he says , imposing good ideas on the basis of heroic assumptions that are not being tested . may i encourage him to carry on his good work ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his kind intervention and warm words . i take them in good grace . he makes an important point . assertations were made throughout the pandemic that things were one way and , despite interrogation , any understanding that they could not possibly be that way was continually denied . that was very frustrating , and i thank him for his encouragement . in november 2021 , dame kate bingham called the decision to cancel the valneva contract “ inexplicable ” . do the uk government still not get that ? why are they still not listening to the one person who came through the pandemic with their reputation enhanced , because she did the job she was tasked to do and did it well ? the british society for immunology has told me that it supports the use of all vaccine technologies where they have proved safe and effective in clinical trials , stating that a broad portfolio of vaccines is important as we move forward in providing protection against future variants . it also notes that mrna vaccines were deployed first as they were the first vaccines to be approved . however , the medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency has since approved the use of eight different covid-19 vaccines that utilise a variety of technologies , including mrna , viral vector , whole virus and protein - based platforms . what is the government ’s strategy to harness the power of all technologies , considering their intended partnership with moderna ? i commend the hon . gentleman for bringing forward the debate . like i thank the hon . gentleman . in essence , we can not unspill the milk . the milk was spilled and there were problems . we have to make sure that that does not happen again and that we learn from the process that led to such tragedy . we must make sure that we have not just a better approach , but the correct systems in place to ensure ongoing safety . the bsi also emphasises a clear and urgent need for second and third - generation covid-19 vaccines , including a universal vaccine , a mucosal vaccine and vaccines that induce longer - lasting protection and immunity . furthermore , given that the “ innovation in diagnostics ” part of the uksha science strategy specifically mentions “ research and development of new diagnostic technologies and innovative platforms ” , that begs the question of how closely corporate entities , such as moderna , will be involved in directing the process . will the minister write to me , setting out in plain detail how such a strategy will harness the expertise of the domestic diagnostic sector , through organisations such as the british in vitro diagnostics association ? during the pandemic , the uk government stood accused of undermining the domestic diagnostic sector , driving some companies under with empty promises of orders , while innovative artificial intelligence technologies such as the caledonia ai blood test and the novacyt ai saliva test were sidelined . both technologies can be adapted to screen for covid and other emerging threats , such as ebola and dengue fever . uploading profile information to ai would allow new , instantaneous border screening for new threats . while the 100 days mission to respond to future pandemic threats may seem ambitious , the reality is that there are around 1.5 million people airborne at any one time , so the case for rapid deployment of accurate diagnostic screening could not be clearer . almost everyone has a smartphone , and dongle - based ai testing could be deployed internationally at the stroke of a key . following my last adjournment debate , i was given a commitment by the minister in the then department for business , energy and industry strategy to jointly host a uk industry roundtable . sadly , despite my persistence , that commitment was not kept . if we lose this intellectual capability and capacity through government inaction , that would be a further betrayal of the domestic diagnostic sector . what are the government doing to secure and develop these technologies now , and will the minister commit to meet me to consider a way forward ? secondly , the timeline for the science strategy stipulates the creation of a vaccine development and evaluation centre by bringing together the ukhsa ’s laboratory - based activity expertise and leadership in vaccine discovery , development and education . what is the need for the creation of yet another organisation , and what mechanism of funding and accountability does the minister envisage for this body ? furthermore , how will this body ethically accommodate the corporate priorities of moderna ? i am especially concerned about sustainability . in april last year , the ukhsa itself was stripped of funding as part of the living with covid strategy , putting the jobs of 40 % of its workforce at risk . yesterday , in a media interview , cambridge virologist dr chris smith warned that there is a risk that we lose focus and deprioritise funding and planning for biological threats . he argued for nimble , well - equipped public health systems in preference to top - down control . for grand strategic commitments to mean anything , funding and resources must find their way to the public health frontline . can the minister set out the plan and address how this new body will be insulated from political tumult and spin ? thirdly , i remain uneasy with the undercurrent of institutional inefficacy from the days of public health england through to the ukhsa and the institutional vacuum in which emergencies are handled reactively by bodies such as the scientific advisory group for emergencies and cobra . module 1 of the current covid inquiry is a testimony to this continued trend . how does the minister envisage the bolstering of these institutions in the face of future pandemics and , crucially , how will these institutions and partnerships be shielded from the perfidious private profiteering and vip lanes that so compromised the uk government throughout the pandemic ? finally , there is another challenge at hand , which every single member of this house will know from their inbox . it may be uncomfortable , but deal with it we must . the pandemic has driven a spike in online disinformation and misinformation , with social media the biggest source of false or misleading information about vaccines . however , we must ask , in light of the false reassurances admitted to yesterday by the former health secretary , whether silencing expert clinical voices is a solution to genuine concerns about the safety of novel therapeutic technologies . in my view , this challenge must be met with evidenced scientific argument and rigour , or we risk perpetuating the belief that something sinister is at hand . my professional experience of managing cancer clinical trials and drug development teams is instructive : we need to take every reported adverse reaction seriously . that is the bedrock of developing and deploying safe therapeutic agents . there is also an opportunity to analyse outcomes on the back of the mass vaccination through a national clinical evaluation . efforts must now be made to examine the vaccinated population and assess the efficacy and safety of the programme . that is quite normal . is vaccine injury possible ? of course it is . injury is possible from exposure to any agent . the proposed mode of insult with mrna — a systemic inflammatory response — is not a new phenomenon . there are established prophylactic protocols to manage such responses , but their efficacy must be tested . pretending otherwise betrays the guiding words of hippocrates—“first do no harm ” . systems for healthcare professionals and coroners to report suspected adverse drug reactions directly to mhra already exist with the yellow card scheme , and they are very well established and used . holding firm to principles of diligently reporting risk , minimising harm and ensuring ethical treatment do not indulge any conspiracy theory . they are fundamental to good clinical practice . members will also have received emails from constituents on the proposed role of the who international health regulations in co - ordinating future global pandemic responses . as i understand it , that proposal has now been modified to be non - binding on signatory states as a result of concerns over loss of local control and sovereignty . yet it is of note that yesterday , the former health secretary attributed to the who the misguided advice he received . that deserves proper scrutiny . the response of government should not be to mock , silence or ridicule members who raise those concerns on behalf of constituents . the only way to address them is through proper clinical evaluation and absolute transparency . before i conclude , i want to raise some further points of challenge from the british society for immunology . the fact that media attention has drifted from covid-19 does not mean it is no longer a significant issue . the rolling seven - day average of deaths sits at around 30 to 100 per day over the last three months . despite that backdrop , very few people are testing for infection . limited testing means that strains can circulate in an unrestricted manner . the more the virus circulates , the more opportunities there will be for the evolution of variants of concern . in the absence of regular widespread testing , it is even more important for waste water surveillance to be maintained at a relatively high level , to act as an early warning system for new variants of concern . according to the bsi , government must prioritise the development of next - generation vaccines and long - term immune monitoring to determine how long effective immunity lasts in the vaccinated population , scale up testing capacity to ensure that previous failure is not replicated , introduce asymptomatic testing in the nhs alongside testing of patients and ensure that nhs laboratories have plans in place for infection surges of all respiratory viruses . therapeutic options are currently very limited , especially in groups that respond poorly to vaccination , while access to antivirals and monoclonal antibody therapies remains patchy across the uk and there is currently no recommended treatment strategy for persistent covid-19 . integrated care boards have yet to announce what will happen when the covid medicines delivery units are retired , and clarity is urgently needed so that clinicians can communicate plans properly to affected patient groups . the delayed effects of covid are complex and difficult to quantify , but at present there is no long - term management plan for long covid . all those challenges must be met . there is no argument in support of the “ pick and mix ” approach of the former health secretary . if we do not capitalise on hindsight , we are damned to repeat the mistakes of the past . i thank i remind the hon . gentleman that pandemic preparedness is a devolved matter and scotland , like all parts of the united kingdom , faced huge pressures . i understand that the former scottish health minister has been giving evidence today and has also pointed that out , saying that “ scotland , like other countries throughout the world , was dealing with a virus which was unknown and new . ” she also said she did not believe that “ there is a plan that would have been possible that would have been able , in and of itself , to cope with covid-19 . ” that sets out how all four nations of the united kingdom were learning about covid . with hindsight , it is very easy to look back and make recommendations , and we must learn from those . i look with interest to the results of the covid inquiry to make sure that we are as prepared as possible for any future pandemics , whether of covid or any other disease . for most people , covid-19 is now a much less serious risk than it was three years ago , and that is in no small part because of the uk ’s world - leading vaccination programme . we were the first country in the world to administer an approved vaccine and the first european nation to protect half our population with at least one dose . that success continues , with vaccines and boosters still on offer to eligible groups , and we take recommendations on when to roll out booster programmes and who to vaccinate from the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation . antivirals provide a further layer of protection for those who are immunocompromised , enabling us to effectively treat eligible people with covid-19 . all those successes have come to protect us against the virus and allowed us to live with covid-19 and regain many of the freedoms that we lost during the pandemic . we have scaled back our covid-19 response because of that reduced risk , but that does not mean that the response is not there . it is scaled back , but it is ready to be stepped up should we need it , focusing on testing , diagnosing , treating and protecting those at greater risk of severe illness . we are keeping vigilant at all times . i work closely with the uk health security agency , which is the organisation that leads on pandemic preparedness . we take its advice extremely seriously . motion lapsed ( motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(fay jones . ) we know that the virus has the potential to evolve with new covid-19 variants that may evade immunity and the vaccinations that we have in place . we also know that we could face new pathogens with pandemic potential , so we remain vigilant at all times not just in the united kingdom but with our global partners . it is imperative that we retain the ability to detect and identify any new covid-19 variants as well as wider threats . the house will be aware that the community infection survey ended in march . it was commissioned by ukhsa as part of a suite of covid-19 surveillance programmes and delivered by the office for national statistics . the survey was world - leading , playing a critical role in enabling decision making during the pandemic . however , it is right to ensure that that surveillance programme remains proportionate , cost - effective and commensurate with how we monitor a range of other infectious diseases that pose a similar risk to public health . that is why we have scaled it back , but again , should we need to , we can step it up . that does not mean that we are not taking any action going forward . we are maintaining surveillance for covid-19 and respiratory pathogens through a number of programmes . those programmes will enable the evaluation and effectiveness of vaccination against a range of clinical outcomes , informing vaccine deployment and appropriate disease management . our surveillance programmes are underpinned by the continuation of genomic sequencing to determine and assess variant severity and vaccine effectiveness . a range of vaccines are still available , which clearly we monitor on an ongoing basis . mrna vaccines are one part of our toolkit , but others are still available . that is why continued surveillance is important , but it is proportionate that it has been reduced since the peak of the pandemic . ukhsa continues to sequence covid samples each week , so should a variant of concern emerge , we would identify it relatively quickly . it publishes the results of that sequencing and surveillance in the national influenza and covid surveillance report . obviously , covid-19 is a global risk , so as well as looking at what is happening in the uk , we continue to support international surveillance , and we work closely in partnership with other organisations and international partners to monitor covid-19 globally . the government continue to fund new variant assessment platforms , increasing the capacity to provide genomic sequencing in nine countries and establishing the international pathogen surveillance network . that will enable us to be alive to the risks of covid-19 elsewhere in the world . i am sure that hon . members will recognise the importance of that work and agree that it is vital to continue it to understand and respond to dangerous new variants should they emerge . if a variant of concern with potential immune evasion is detected , the government have proportionate contingency response capabilities in place , a range of which are set out . those capabilities will support an initial response to any new and dangerous variant of concern . the department for health and social care and ukhsa continue to work together to ensure that appropriate commercial mechanisms are in place to support a longer response to covid-19 , whether through testing or vaccination . i do not agree with the hon . gentleman that vaccination is the only tool in our armoury . our surveillance is our key weapon in identifying a new variant of concern . we still have testing capability should we need it , and of course , our vaccination programmes are nimble and can respond to any new variant should it emerge . the minister is giving an interesting response to the question about surveillance . what is the surveillance mechanism exactly ? can she take us through how the virus is being monitored in the wild ? what practical steps are being taken ? is waste water being assessed ? how is it being identified ? what border controls are expected if there is a novel threat somewhere else in the world ? how are we managing our borders and ensuring that the 1.5 million passengers in the air at any one time do not immediately bring a new threat right to our door ? there are several ways , and i did try to set some of them out . as i said , ukhsa tests samples from covid - positive patients around the country every week and does genomic sequencing to identify new variants or variants of concern . we are not currently doing international border checks , but we are working with international partners , so should a new variant emerge in another country , we can step up that capability . we introduced border controls on new arrivals a couple of months ago due to the risk of a new variant from china , but that was stepped down because testing showed that there was no risk to the general population . waste water testing is also still available should it be required , so there is a range of testing capabilities to identify variants of concern and respond quite quickly . moving on to vaccines , we are developing mrna capability , but not just in covid-19 vaccinations . that is one way of delivering covid vaccinations , but that capability is also being used for respiratory illnesses and cancer vaccination trials . there is the potential for that technology to be used in a range of vaccines , not just for covid-19 . a range of different vaccines are available , and should a variant of concern or change of variant emerge , we will take advice from the jcvi as to which vaccine is best to use and which group of the population is best to vaccinate . that is an ongoing piece of work . on some of the hon . gentleman ’s other points , the covid inquiry is obviously ongoing . as the minister responsible for pandemic preparedness , i am keen to learn the lessons about testing capability , ppe , and vulnerable groups that may need greater protection in future pandemics . but we also need to be live to the fact that a pathogen could emerge that is completely different from covid , flu , or avian flu , which we are also monitoring actively . we need to be nimble in our response to any future pandemic . my concern is that we may just look at covid as the only future threat , but that is absolutely not our policy ; we are looking at a wide range of threats , both in the uk and abroad . the minister referred to mrna technology . are the government absolutely convinced that the technology is safe and effective ? are they in danger of putting all their eggs into that particular basket ? we are certainly not putting all our eggs in the mrna basket for covid , or for any other use of mrna technology . such vaccines must still pass the mhra assessment in order to be licensed for use . as mrna technology develops for other clinical conditions , whether cancer or respiratory illnesses , those vaccines will also have to be awarded a licence by the mhra . it is not the case that mrna vaccines are given carte blanche because they have been used in covid ; they will have to pass the necessary research hurdles to gain licences for future use . we are certainly not just relying on mrna for covid — although it has been effective and the technology means that it can react to variants and be altered depending on the variant . we are using other vaccines for covid , and working with other partners . i reassure my hon . friend on that . i am very happy to continue updating members on the progress that we are making and any future booster vaccination programmes for covid-19 that will be running , and to update the house on the work of ukhsa regarding monitoring , surveillance , and future testing capabilities . i thank the minister for being a good sport and allowing me to intervene again . i did make a couple of requests in my contribution : i asked for some written feedback from the minister , and whether she would be able to find time in her diary for a meeting to discuss some of the finer points . i would be very grateful if she would agree to that . i am very happy to meet up with the hon . gentleman , and also to write to him regarding the specific points on which he asked for clarification . it is important that we give the public confidence that our vaccine portfolio is very diverse , guarding against both current variants and future variants . the contracts that we have in place with vaccine developers are flexible , so should the need arise , we have the ability to stand up vaccinations in a speedy manner . i am happy to write to the hon . gentleman and to meet with him , because in order to bust some of those myths that he has pointed out exist , it is important that we are open and transparent about the arrangements that are in place , the risks that we face , and the tools that we have in our arsenal to fight any future pandemic . with that , madam deputy speaker , i will draw my remarks to a close . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . that the relationships and sexuality education ( northern ireland ) ( amendment ) regulations 2023 ( s.i. , 2023 , no . 602 ) , dated the house divided : ayes 373 , noes 28 . question accordingly agreed to .