the secretary of state was asked — what steps she is taking to reduce net migration . what steps she is taking to reduce net migration . net migration is too high , and this government are determined to bring it down . indeed , that was one of the reasons why i voted and campaigned to leave the european union in 2016 . last month , i announced measures to reduce the number of student dependants coming to the uk , which has soared by 35 % , and to stop people transferring from student visas to work visas . we expect net migration to return to sustainable levels over time , and immigration policy is under constant review . the labour - plaid coalition in cardiff has declared wales a “ sanctuary for all . ” the world is welcome . however , its ukrainian super - sponsor scheme fell apart due to a lack of accommodation and planning , with families still crammed into single rooms . what discussions has the secretary of state had with the welsh labour government about the collapse of their super - sponsor scheme ? does she know how many families are still inappropriately placed ? we are very proud of this country ’s track record on providing sanctuary to people in need , and i am very proud of the support that the government have given to ukrainians fleeing putin ’s barbaric war . but when it comes to broader accommodation costs relating to asylum seekers , it is clear that we are spending far too much—£6 million a day , or £ 3 billion a year — on housing asylum seekers in hotels . my hon . friend raises a very important point . she speaks frankly to labour ’s abject failure to offer any viable plan for support . labour is naive about the problem , and it is unrealistic about the solution . labour has no idea and no plan , and it is letting wales down . do the government have any plans to amend the minimum salary requirement for the skilled worker visa scheme ? we always keep the salary threshold under review but , as i said , net migration is too high and we need to get overall numbers down . how do we do that ? well , employers need to recruit more people who are already here , rather than advertising abroad so much . we also need to get more people off welfare and back into economic activity , and our welfare reforms will help with that objective . we can not ignore the pressure that record levels of people coming to the uk puts on housing supply , public services and community relations . that is why we need to focus on lowering net migration . of course , net emigration is the problem in some parts of the uk . will the home secretary pay attention to the plight of our economy in the lakes and dales , where almost two thirds of businesses are failing to meet demand because of a lack of workforce ? i have been speaking to the minister for immigration about a youth mobility visa scheme , negotiated bilaterally with other countries in europe , to solve our economic needs so that our hospitality and tourism industries can survive . how is the home secretary getting on with those discussions ? migration is a very complex issue , and of course we have to balance the needs of the labour market . that is why we are very pleased to support well - crafted youth mobility schemes . there is one with india , and i have just come back from new zealand , where we have expanded our youth mobility scheme . they are great schemes that allow the exchange of young people , who can come here to serve and work in our economy . it is very clear that the issue of migration must be settled and sorted out . at the same time , it is important to note that those who have come from eastern europe , the middle east and africa are contributing to the economy of my strangford constituency . i think the secretary of state is committed to ensuring that continues , but what discussions has she had with the northern ireland assembly to ensure that we continue to have the workers we need ? no single measure can control net migration , but as the prime minister has been clear , net migration is too high . that is why i recently announced a series of measures aimed at reducing the number of student dependants , which has risen exponentially over the past few years , and ensuring that students come here in a more proportionate and balanced way . i call the shadow home secretary . will the home secretary wish the deputy chairman of the conservative party , the sorry fact of the matter is that labour wants open borders and unlimited migration . there is a malaise descending upon the labour party , and it does not even know what it thinks . labour ’s sadiq khan has said that he wants more migration . labour ’s party chairman has confirmed that numbers could rise under a labour government . when the shadow home secretary was asked whether she wanted net migration to rise or fall , she , in the characteristic style we have come to know and love , could not even answer the question . that is what we always get with labour — order . may i just say that you have no responsibility for the labour party and , in fairness , this is home office questions ? the home secretary could not answer the question : does she support her own social care visas or not ? she spent all weekend briefing that she agrees with her back benchers , but today she can not even answer the basic question . making up stuff about the labour party will not help her when her party has been in power for 13 years and when work visas have doubled , exactly because the government have failed to tackle skills shortages or issues in the labour market . this is total chaos . we have a rwanda policy that is not removing anyone ; an impact assessment that says her policies will not work and will cost much more ; a 50 % drop in removals of foreign criminals — the inspector says this is because the home office can not even identify who can be removed ; a record number of people in hotels ; a record high asylum backlog ; and back benchers writing the home secretary ’s immigration policy because they do not think she is up to the job . it has been a humiliating few weeks for the home secretary — order . sorry , but you are not going to take advantage of me in that way — that is totally unfair . i can not pull one side up and allow the other to take advantage of it . i expect all the back benchers to be able to get their questions in today . this is about everybody having the same opportunity to get involved , so please do not do that again . thank you , mr speaker . we all know that only the conservative party and this prime minister have a serious plan to stop the boats and stop illegal migration , and that labour stands for only one thing : open borders and unlimited migration . labour members would rather spend their time campaigning to block the deportation of foreign criminals than back our illegal migration bill . they are on the side of the criminal gangs , not on the side of the british people . whether her department has had recent discussions with the industrial hemp industry on licensing . the hon . gentleman will recall that the two of us met just a few weeks ago , on i recollect the conversation well . we have an opportunity within the uk to grow hemp on an industrial scale and so feed many growing industries that use hemp to produce environmentally friendly products . the growth of these industries has been hampered by overly complicated regulations and a poor application process . meanwhile , foreign companies are racing ahead in this arena . to protect uk farmers and encourage uk industry , will the minister consider giving the licensing process over to the department for environment , food and rural affairs and making the process farmer friendly ? it is , of course , important to make sure that uk industry can compete globally , and a light - touch regulatory framework is important in that . we should be aware that some parts of the plant contain high levels of thc — tetrahydrocannabinol — and do need regulation , which is the home office ’s concern . i will be meeting defra colleagues in the near future to make sure that our approach to regulation is as light - touch as possible , because , like him , i want to see our domestic industry flourish and i do not want any excessive regulation . what recent progress her department has made on reviewing the police funding formula . the government have said they will be reviewing the police funding formula , and i hope to have news for the house in the relatively near future about initiating the consultation process . the formula is quite out of date and it needs overhauling , and we are working on that . the record number of 1,455 police officers in bedfordshire and the recent £ 6 million special grant are both very welcome indeed , but does the minister recognise that it is simply not fair or right to go on funding a force with a series of one - off special grants that really need to be part of core funding ? my hon . friend makes a good point . i should take this opportunity to pay tribute to the bedfordshire police and crime commissioner , festus akinbusoye , who has done a fantastic job for the people of bedfordshire . he advocated for more funding via the special grant and was successful . he is a great representative for the people of bedfordshire and i am pleased that he has delivered record police numbers in bedfordshire , just as the government have delivered record numbers of police across the whole of england and wales . i call the shadow minister . the chief constable of west yorkshire police , john robins qpm , recently told the bbc that his force does not have the resources that it needs to deliver the service that the public expect . cutting through the spin , he said that the force was down 2,000 staff and £ 140 million since 2010 . he said his force could deal with major incidents and crimes , but only at a cost to neighbourhood policing . this comes from a force that was rated outstanding in planning and the use of resources in its latest inspection by his majesty ’s inspectorate of constabulary and fire and rescue services . which bit of policing does the minister think should not be done because forces simply do not have the resources ? the shadow minister will know that in the police funding settlement for this year , 2023 - 24 , there is around about £ 500 million extra — in fact , it is slightly over £ 500 million — for police forces up and down the country . that has enabled us to deliver a record number of officers ever . there are 149,572 officers — about 3,500 more than there were under the last labour government . in west yorkshire , which the shadow minister asked about , neighbourhood crime is down by 30 % since 2019 and overall crime — excluding fraud and computer misuse , which came into the figures only recently — is down by 52 % since 2010 . i am still waiting for the shadow home secretary to apologise for being a member of a government who presided over crime levels that are double those we have today . what recent progress her department has made on reducing the backlog of asylum applications . what recent progress her department has made on reducing the backlog of asylum applications . we are making good progress , and the latest home office statistics show that asylum decisions are up , with a 35 % increase since last year in the number made . productivity has increased , and we are on track to have 2,500 decision makers by september , which represents a quadrupling of the number of case workers . like many members from all parties , i am constantly contacted by refugees who are desperate to know what is happening to their asylum claim after years of waiting , so i asked the home office how many refugees in newcastle had been waiting for one , two , three , four and five years . the answer came back that the home office does not know — it does not even record the data . instead of indulging in unworkable , unethical , illegal and unaffordable flights of rwandan fantasy , why does the home secretary not focus on her day job and fix the asylum backlog ? as i just said , we are making good progress on reducing the asylum backlog . important though the reducing the backlog is , however , it can not be the totality of a plan . this is the point that the labour party does not seem to understand : we have to stop the boats coming in the first place . that is the only sustainable way to tackle the issue . even if we grant our way out of this problem , as the shadow home secretary seems to propose , the pressures on the state still remain ; they are simply transferred to local authorities and the benefits system , and the british taxpayer continues to pick up the bill . the minister has an interesting definition of being “ on track ” ; did the number of decision makers not fall between january and may this year , from 1,333 to 1,280 ? a constituent recently passed on to me a letter from a firm of local solicitors that said : “ all possible avenues have been considered to avoid this situation but regrettably , the home office ’s long term failure to progress asylum claims , and current government immigration policy , has made it financially unsustainable for ” these solicitors “ to continue legally aided work . ” how does it help us as mps on both sides of the house in our constituency offices , and how does it help with the backlog that the home office says it wants to reduce , to make sure that people do not have the legal representation they need to unblock the system and allow progress in asylum cases ? i can assure the hon . gentleman that the problem with our asylum system is not a lack of lawyers ; there are plenty of legal representatives around . we have had strong overall progress on the backlog , and i am pleased to say that the early data that i have received suggests that last week saw the best performance in four years . i know how seriously the minister takes dealing with the legacy backlog , but , as the home secretary showed at the recent home affairs committee , in order to deal with that backlog in the timeframe that the government have set themselves it would require at least a quadrupling of the number of cases being dealt with as from my hon . friend makes an important point . the home secretary , the prime minister and i explicitly chose not to pursue the blanket amnesty approach that the previous labour government pursued . instead , we put in the hard yards to improve productivity by streamlining processes , reducing unnecessary bureaucracy , ensuring that , where appropriate , interviews were conducted in a timely fashion , and recruiting more decision makers . since my right hon . friend the home secretary appeared before the committee , i am pleased to say that the data coming out of our caseworking team is very strong . we are seeing significant progress . as i just said , early indication suggests that last week was the best for over four years . i am a bit mystified . given that 95 % of these applications are successful , is it not the case that , if we speed up the process and make it easier and easier , more and more people will come ? is not the only solution to detain people and to deport them — offshore them ? those who suggest anything else are living in cloud cuckoo land and every single county will face what we face in lincolnshire with thousands of illegal migrants having to be housed in unsuitable places . let us have an answer for once . the approach that the home secretary and i have taken has been both to ensure that , where there are high grant rate nationalities , cases are pursued swiftly , and where there are low grant rate nationalities , such as albanians — individuals from a safe european country — who can and should be returned as quickly as possible , we do just that . at this point last year , 30 % of those arriving on small boats were coming from albania ; today , it is less than 2 % . that arrangement is clearly making good progress . none the less , my right hon . friend makes an important point : those who suggest that we can simply grant our way out of this problem are , i am afraid , hopelessly naive . the idea that the individuals coming across on small boats will , in most cases , make a significant net contribution to our economy is wrong . the costs to the taxpayer are very significant . the ongoing costs of education , access to welfare and community cohesion are very significant , which is why we need to stop the boats in the first place . i call the shadow minister . the government ’s destruction of their own asylum system can best be described as an act of arson and their plans to fix it are utterly farcical . they have sent more home secretaries than asylum seekers to rwanda . they sent the prime minister on a victory lap in dover , apparently failing to notice that the weather improves over the summer and the boat numbers increase . and they were in such a flap about losing votes on their bigger backlog bill that they resorted to dragging lord lebedev of siberia into the division lobby . now the court of appeal ruling has revealed that rwanda is able to process only 100 claims per year — around 0.3 % of those who arrived on small boats last year . can the minister tell me what he is planning to do with the remaining 99.7 % , and does he therefore agree that the prospect of the rwanda plan actually deterring any migrant from crossing the channel is close to zero ? i used to say that the labour party does not have a plan , but the truth is that it does have a plan , but it is a plan that would make things significantly worse . it is a plan that would ensure more granting of cases ; more safe and legal routes , so even more individuals would come here ; more hotels ; and more cost to the british taxpayer . what is so disgraceful is the level of hypocrisy . we only have to look at the record of welsh labour to see that . in wales , the welsh minister for social justice declared on 15 occasions in the senedd that labour - run wales was “ a nation of sanctuary ” , but across the same period , labour - run wales accommodated 176 fewer asylum seekers . in fact , the latest published data shows that labour - run wales has taken just half the number of people that it should per capita . whether she has had recent discussions with the devolved administrations on the illegal migration bill . i have engaged regularly with the devolved administrations on the illegal migration bill since its introduction in march , in addition to my periodic meetings with my ministerial counterparts on a variety of immigration issues . most recently , i met the scottish minister for equalities , migration and refugees in may . looking ahead , the bill is on the agenda for the inter - ministerial group for safety , security and migration , which my right hon . and learned friend the home secretary will chair later this month . the bill will place restrictions on the powers of scottish ministers , removing the entitlement for victims of human trafficking and exploitation to access scottish government - funded support services , and will undermine the scottish government ’s ability to deliver on their trafficking and exploitation strategy . we know what route the government ’s damaging ideology is dragging them down , but why should scotland ’s elected parliament and the devolved administrations be dragged down the same route , when it is abundantly clear that we want no part of the hostile environment ideology ? if the scottish government cared so deeply about this issue , they would accommodate more asylum seekers . the snp government are accommodating just 4.5 % of the total asylum population being accommodated in the uk , when scotland makes up 8.1 % of the uk population . i took the time to look at some of the statistics for those local authorities in scotland where the snp is the largest party : clackmannanshire , zero asylum seekers ; dundee , zero asylum seekers ; east ayrshire , zero ; east dunbartonshire , zero ; midlothian , zero ; north ayrshire — want to take a guess , mr speaker ? — zero ; north lanarkshire , six — order . no , no , no — you are going to get my drift . we can not read out phone numbers . this is not the “ yellow pages ” advert . one or two statistics are fine , but when we get to five i really do worry . let us have the snp spokesperson . the minister clearly thinks that that is a very clever line , but he knows well that glasgow takes more refugees per head of population than any other local authority in the united kingdom . the line he is trotting out is simply wrong and it is insulting to all those in scotland who have opened their homes to ukrainians , the communities across the country who have welcomed syrians and the volunteers in the big cities who work with asylum seekers every day , helping them to overcome trauma . if he wants scotland to do more to welcome refugees , when is he going to devolve the power and the financial levers that would allow us to do so ? for good reason , immigration is a reserved matter , but the statistics i have just read out make the point as clear as can be . the snp tries its very best to undermine the government ’s work to stop the boats , but it refuses to accommodate these people when they arrive , and the costs of its fake humanitarianism are borne by everyone but itself . that is not just hypocrisy ; it is deeply irresponsible , and the public have had enough . it is not the scottish government ’s policy towards immigration , refugees and asylum seekers that has been ruled unlawful by the court of appeal . if the minister wants the system to work and he wants the scottish government to do their part , he must take more action to clear the backlog , as we have heard ; there must be proper safe and legal rights for people to arrive ; and they must be given the right to work when they get here , because then they can pay for their own accommodation and they will not cost the taxpayer money . just the other day , the home office suggested to the scottish government that a vessel that had been used to house ukrainian refugees in leith could be used for others who are asylum seekers — the same vessel , the same port , the same provider , the same package . what did the snp say ? no . what recent assessment she has made of the compatibility of the illegal migration bill with the 1951 un refugee convention . while i am pleased that the court of appeal found that the government are not in breach of our obligations under the refugee convention , i fundamentally disagree with the judgment that rwanda is not a safe place for refugees and we are seeking permission to appeal . the government take our international obligations very seriously and we are satisfied that the provisions in the illegal migration bill comply with the refugee convention . the fundamental principle remains , however , that those in need of protection should claim asylum at the earliest opportunity and in the first safe country that they reach . the home secretary and the government website say that they are satisfied that the provisions of the illegal migration bill comply with the 1951 un refugee convention . i am looking for clarity from the home secretary . what exactly is it about persecuting the most vulnerable groups , creating a hostile environment and stripping people of their right to seek safety that complies so well with the un refugee convention ? as i have made clear , we take our international obligations very seriously , and we are satisfied that the bill complies with the refugee convention . with respect to the hon . lady , i will not take lectures from the snp on this matter . snp members are , as my right hon . friend the un refugee agency has its own asylum seeker relocation programme : it flies asylum seekers from libya to rwanda in a scheme part - funded by the european union . how on earth can rwanda be deemed not to be a safe country if the un refugee agency itself is using it as a safe haven ? as always , my hon . friend makes a powerful point , and i could not agree with him more . the united nations high commissioner for refugees runs an extensive scheme in rwanda , and supports the resettlement of many thousands of migrants . i met some of them in my recent visit to rwanda . they are happy and grateful for the generosity and welcome that rwanda has offered them , which has allowed them to restart their lives . i am frankly very disappointed by the constant smears and assumptions , which are based on outdated and ignorant views , denigrating our allies in rwanda . i am nothing but grateful to our partners in rwanda for the continued co - operation . what steps she is taking to tackle street crime by young people . i am pleased to report that , according to the crime survey , violence is down by 41 % and criminal damage is down by 68 % since 2010 . but we would like to do more . that is why we now have record numbers of police and why we are investing in the safer streets fund , £ 200 million in the youth endowment fund and £ 170 million in violence reduction units . we have also launched our antisocial behaviour strategy , about which the home secretary will speak in a moment . now is a good time to put on the record an intervention made by mr speaker in his capacity as the member of parliament for chorley . thanks to his recent intervention with me and the chief constable , chorley town centre is one of the areas that will receive antisocial behaviour hotspot patrols , and i am sure that the people of chorley are very grateful to mr speaker for the intervention that he made on their behalf . well done , mr speaker ! i thank the minister for his reply . some young people who are arrested because they are guilty of antisocial behaviour , or so - called low - level crime , are released without charge because there is a reluctance to criminalise them . too often , those youngsters go on to commit further multiple crimes , and are arrested and released without charge each time . what steps will my right hon . friend take to end this roundabout of unpunished crime and ensure that young people who repeatedly break the law are not released without charge but are treated as what they are — criminals ? we want to see tougher action on things such as antisocial behaviour and public drug use ; we should have zero tolerance for any of those things . as part of the asb strategy we are launching instant justice , whereby people who perpetrate acts of antisocial behaviour will rapidly — ideally within 48 hours — be made to do clean - ups and those kinds of things in their local area , to pay back visibly , publicly , rapidly and with enforcement . we are trialling that in 10 police force areas , starting this month , and it will be rolled out to every police force in the country , with funding , by april next year . i completely agree with everything my hon . friend said . the minister may not be aware that i was chair of the cross - party youth violence commission . we published an interim report in 2018 and a final one in 2020 . our first recommendation was for the government to adopt a public health approach to tackling violence through regional violence reduction units and long - term strategies . what action is the minister taking to ensure that violence reduction units have the long - term funding that they need to achieve the best possible outcomes ? i agree with the approach that the hon . lady sets out , and we have already taken action . she asks about long - term plans . she will be aware that the youth endowment fund of £ 210 million is a 10 - year programme , and that violence reduction units — called violence reduction partnerships in some places — have so far received £ 170 million , and receive funding each and every year , including an allocation this year . the kinds of things that we find work include diversionary activities for young people . in fact , when i asked the chief executive of the yef what the most effective intervention is , he said that it was cognitive behavioural therapy , which gets used as well . i repeat one statistic that i mentioned earlier : since 2010 , violence is down by 41 % and criminal damage by 68 % . a report today found that nearly half of women who experienced or witnessed a crime in the past year chose not to report it because they did not believe that the police would treat it seriously . his majesty ’s inspector , in his latest state of policing report , said that the police were experiencing one of their biggest crises in living memory , there were widespread systematic failings and they were simply not getting the basics right . having pushed our british model of policing by consent to the very brink , do the government take responsibility , do they agree with the inspector that substantial reform is essential , and will they back labour ’s plans to restore neighbourhood policing , halve serious violence and raise confidence in every force — or is the minister happy to keep twiddling his thumbs while the criminals get away with it ? i must say , in the gentlest terms , that my constituency neighbour has a bit of cheek to talk about reducing crime , given that according to the crime survey , crime levels under the last labour government were around double what they are today . [ interruption . ] she shakes her head , but that is from the office for national statistics , and it is the only statistically recognised long - term measure of crime . if she does not like the ons figures , she can go and argue with it . she might not like them , but those are the figures . in relation to the hon . lady ’s serious question about rasso — rape and serious sexual offences — particularly on women , the proportion being reported is much higher than it was a few years ago , which is welcome . there is a lot more to do , which is why there is a rape review and a rape action plan . my right hon . and learned friend the home secretary and the under - secretary of state for the home department , my hon . friend what steps her department is taking to help tackle antisocial behaviour . whether her department plans to increase police resources to help tackle antisocial behaviour . earlier in the year , i launched the antisocial behaviour action plan , which includes increasing funding for police and crime commissioners by over £ 100 million , delivering stronger and swifter punishment , increasing police visibility in response , and banning nitrous oxide . antisocial behaviour is not a low - level crime . it blights communities , and that is why the government are committed to tackling it effectively . today , to coincide with anti - social behaviour awareness week , the all - party parliamentary group on antisocial behaviour has published a report with the charity resolve asb , which demonstrates , among other things , that 1.7 million people a day experience antisocial behaviour . some 58 % believe that the government are not doing enough . will the home secretary meet members of the all - party parliamentary group and me to look at the recommendations in that report ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his work on the all - party parliamentary group , and i am sure that the policing minister and/or i will meet him to learn more about the vital work that he has led . may i take the opportunity to applaud the officers of cheshire police force in the hon . gentleman ’s area ? i have had the pleasure of meeting the excellent chief constable , mark roberts . i applaud the conservative police and crime commissioner , john dwyer , who has rolled out a scheme on antisocial behaviour that provides more cctv and increases the first - responder response . there is a record number of police officers in cheshire , and the force has received over £ 3 million - worth of safer streets funding . the results are a 26 % fall in neighbourhood crime and a 17 % fall in drugs offences in cheshire . that is common - sense policing , thanks to the police officers and government support . hampshire and isle of wight constabulary is one of the lowest - funded police forces in the uk , and with a decade of cuts to youth services , antisocial behaviour has been left to thrive under this government . we have seen the consequences at south parade pier , the camber and many other places in portsmouth . neighbourhood policing is vital in cracking down on asb , which ruins so many lives . therefore , what explanation can the home secretary provide for halving the number of police community support officers over the past 13 years ? the hon . gentleman and i represent constituencies that are served by the same police force , and i am really proud of the track record in hampshire . i am really proud of how the new chief constable , scott chilton , has assumed his role , with a real focus on back - to - basics policing ; i am really proud of how the conservative police and crime commissioner , donna jones , has led initiatives so that every community in hampshire will have named , dedicated police officers and pcsos serving them , bolstering neighbourhood policing and building confidence ; and i am really proud of the fact that hampshire has seen a 15 % fall in neighbourhood crime since 2019 — common - sense policing serving the community . does my right hon . and learned friend agree that some of the principal victims of antisocial behaviour are young people ? the government are absolutely right to bring forward new measures to tackle antisocial behaviour to make our streets , parks and public spaces safer for the vast majority of young people who do not engage in those negative behaviours . my right hon . friend is absolutely correct . there is such a need for greater diversion and greater support for young people , so that they do not spend their time loitering in shopping centres , causing a nuisance in car parks or harassing members of the community . that is why our antisocial behaviour action plan commits considerable funding — over £ 160 million of new funding — including for an increased police presence in asb hotspot areas and to support the roll - out of diversionary resources to support young people so that they do not fall into crime and antisocial behaviour . youth zones are exceptional , especially the chorley inspire one . yet again , in ilkley and marley in my constituency , travellers have set up camp , caused damage and intimidated residents , which just last weekend resulted in ilkley pool having to close temporarily . when they have gone , they leave a complete mess , which all has to be cleaned up at taxpayers ’ expense . will the home secretary meet me to discuss what additional support west yorkshire police and our local council can get to address this ongoing issue ? my hon . friend raises a really important point about illegal encampments and travellers who blight communities by causing a nuisance and who , in some cases , threaten communities — it is unacceptable behaviour . that is why we legislated in the police , crime , sentencing and courts act 2022 to toughen up the powers and measures available to the police , so that they can take more robust steps in relation to this issue , but i am very happy to speak to my hon . friend about what more can be done locally . what recent progress her department has made on reducing the use of hotels as contingency asylum accommodation . what recent progress her department has made on reducing the use of hotels as contingency asylum accommodation . the home office seeks to end the use of hotels and to move asylum seekers to less expensive , more suitable accommodation . to support that , we are bringing into use large , disused military sites and vessels , which will provide adequate , safe , secure , non - detained accommodation for asylum seekers and also reduce the pull factor to the united kingdom . i recently received an email from the home office that said that the use of hotels to house asylum seekers is “ inappropriate ” , and that reliance on them must be reduced . in the same email , the home office informed me that it planned to increase the use of hotel accommodation for asylum seekers in my constituency of erdington by 159%—the single biggest increase in the whole of birmingham . how on earth can the minister expect the country to trust him when he can not even keep his policies consistent within the same email ? the policy that we have adopted is one of maximising the capacity of the hotels that we have for as long as we have them . that is saving the taxpayer at least a quarter of a billion pounds and reducing reliance on hotels elsewhere in the country . i do appreciate that there are pressures on the hon . lady ’s local authority , and i also appreciate that some labour local authorities , such as westminster city council , say that asylum seekers must be housed in individual , ensuite bedrooms . we do not agree with that : it is a gross waste of taxpayers ’ money that would make the uk a soft touch . in my constituency , i have had the same experience as my hon . friend we have been very clear that we and the police take extremely seriously any young person who goes missing from a hotel or any other form of accommodation . local police forces and home office personnel treat that exactly as they would any other child going missing and they conduct a full missing person inquiry . however , the only sustainable answer to young people living in hotels is to stop the boats in the first place . doing nothing is not an option . doing nothing will lead to more young people living in those hotels and being exposed to human traffickers . while i do very much welcome the minister ’s determination to move away from hotels and towards other accommodation , will he give particular attention to the wiltshire hotel and golf club in my constituency ? the number there has gone up : there are now 120 people there , and they are all crammed into very small accommodation . it is not only bad from the point of view of the golf club members and neighbouring long - term residents with them in housing next door , but it is an extremely bad place from the point of view of the asylum seekers . they have nowhere to go and nothing to do . they have no education facilities and no religious facilities . they are stuck in the middle of the countryside with no transport , and it is quite the wrong place for them to be . will the minister please give particular attention to the wiltshire hotel ? i am familiar with the hotel in my hon . friend ’s constituency and the concerns he has raised . i will take a look at that , but as i have said previously , the answer to this challenge is to stop the boats coming in the first place . that is why we all need to support the illegal migration bill . those who want more hotels would oppose it . the labour party ’s policy will see more hotels , and the shadow home secretary will end up with more hotels to her name than paris hilton . i do not know how to follow that , mr speaker . all members would like to see a reduction in the number of hotels used for asylum accommodation — i am sure that is true — but will the minister spend a moment to congratulate the community of sharnbrook , and in particular rev. paolo di leo and councillor doug mcmurdo , on providing a welcoming environment for people who are put in such accommodation ? i think there are signs across the country that communities do come together in these difficult circumstances to achieve an outcome that is beneficial for everyone . i would be very happy to put on record my view of the good work being done by my hon . friend ’s constituents . he is right to say that there are voluntary and community groups , charities and churches right across the country that support asylum seekers while they are in this form of accommodation , and we and our providers facilitate that wherever possible . if she will make a statement on her departmental responsibilities . i am going to make a short topical statement . the information that meta and other tech companies give to uk law enforcement helps to protect around 1,200 children and leads to over 100 arrests of suspected child abusers every month . however , meta plans to roll out end - to - end encryption soon , without safeguards , and it will no longer proactively detect and alert authorities to child grooming and abuse material on facebook , messenger and instagram direct . this will be a huge boon to anyone who wants to hurt a child . the online safety bill will hold tech firms to account , but indifference to abuse is intolerable . i have written to mark zuckerberg — together with my right hon . friend the minister for security , following recent knife crime incidents in my constituency and in the medway towns , will my right hon . friend meet me and our kent police and crime commissioner , matthew scott , to discuss funding and how the home office can further support kent police with the increased challenges we are facing in kent due to our proximity to london ? i very much appreciate the particular challenges in kent relating to knife crime . that is why i am glad that since 2019 , kent has received £ 5.5 million in core violence reduction unit grant funding , and £ 730,000 in additional support for targeted youth interventions . i have met the police and crime commissioner , and chief constable tim smith . they are both excellent at leading their forces , and there is now a record number of police officers in kent . i am sure the minister for crime , policing and fire , my right hon . friend i call the shadow home secretary . the home secretary will be aware of the documentary last week on the relationship between boris johnson and others , and former kgb officer alexander lebedev , and about the meeting in an italian villa , the ignoring of security advice on lords appointments , and the decision not to sanction alexander lebedev . given the importance of national security , will she tell the house whether she has any concerns about those reports ? will she set up an independent investigation into what happened , into who knew what , and into how far the security risk spreads ? at the home office , the minister for security and i take seriously the threats posed by hostile state actors . that is why the minister for security is chairing the defending democracy taskforce , bringing together agencies and departments in a cross - whitehall approach to tackling the serious threats that we all face as parliamentarians and facing those in public office . i gently remind the right hon . lady that one of her own parliamentary colleagues has a very dubious track record when it comes to working with the chinese communist party . what steps is my right hon . friend taking to ensure that police funding reflects rurality and the huge uplift in population experienced in remote coastal locations during the summer tourist season ? as i said in response to an earlier question , the government intend to consult in due course on a new police funding formula , and part of that consultation will involve looking at the factors that should be taken into account . those might include things such as population and crime levels , but things such as rurality , sparsity and seasonality , particularly seasonal tourism , are likely to form part of the new formula . i encourage members across the house to engage closely with that consultation when it comes forward , to ensure that those factors are properly accounted for . i refer members to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . in recent weeks , the media have carried stories of patients who were receiving medical cannabis on private prescriptions , and who are now having their prescriptions paid for by the nhs . on the surface that is a great leap forward , but parents of children with intractable epilepsy who have been asking for such things for years are still being ignored . will the home office consider reopening the 2018 licensing scheme to enable those children who are already being privately prescribed medical cannabis to have access to it via their nhs gp ? many cannabis base compounds were moved wholesale to schedule 2 a few years ago , enabling them to be prescribed . the question that the hon . gentleman asked about nhs prescription is perfectly reasonable and fair , but prescriptions on the nhs are a matter for the department of health and social care and for the nhs , including the nhs in scotland . i would be happy to pass on his inquiry to them . may i assure my right hon . friend the home secretary that the majority of my constituents in sittingbourne and sheppey understand that sending illegal migrants to rwanda for processing is key to stopping small - boat crossings in the channel ? will she assure them that despite concerted opposition from the labour party , she will deliver her plan ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for that question . we are disappointed by the judgment of the court of appeal , but we are determined to follow through . he is right to say that we have to add deterrence to the system , as it is only by breaking the business model of the people smugglers that we will stop the boats . my constituents want community policing . kim mcguinness , the police and crime commissioner for northumbria , has put in place a redeployment programme to get an extra 134 officers into neighbourhoods , but that will not make up for the 1,100 officers and the £ 148 million that we have lost due to budget cuts . and before the minister mentions “ plans ” , that will still leave us 400 officers short . why have the tories failed so badly to get police officers on to the beat ? as i mentioned in earlier answers , across england and wales we now have record police numbers of 149,572 . the previous peak was 146,030 in 2010 , so we have 3,500 more officers than we have ever had before across england and wales . in northumbria , the number has gone up by 512 since 2015 . of course , many of the powers sit with the pcc , including powers over the precept . it is entirely open to police and crime commissioners to use those powers . today , operation centurion has started across lancashire , utilising £ 2 million from the government to put more police officers on our streets tackling antisocial behaviour . in my constituency , that means almost 2,500 extra hours of police patrols in padiham . it will have a major impact , but we can do more . can i ask the home secretary whether the safer streets fund will have another round so that we can make physical changes , as well as getting more officers on the streets ? i am delighted with the progress being made to tackle antisocial behaviour in burnley and padiham . as my hon . friend will know , we have allocated almost £ 1 million to roll out pilots of asb hotspot response in 2023 - 24 . a new round of safer streets will be announced soon . i take this opportunity to thank lancashire police , which has launched an asb problem - solving unit . it ran operation propulsion , which involved more officers patrolling locations dealing with motor nuisance and boy racers , and it has had a real good crackdown on residential burglary thanks to operation defender . neighbourhood crime has fallen by 26 % in lancashire . tribute must be paid to chief constable chris rowley and the police and crime commissioner , andrew snowden . given the exchanges earlier , i am obliged to ask the home secretary whether she understands the difference between using a cruise ship for the temporary accommodation of ukrainian refugees , with a shared language and experience , and who have the right to work and are being actively relocated in the community , and using it essentially as a prison ship for the indefinite long - term detention of asylum seekers , who have no right to leave , no right to work , no right to benefits and no recourse to public funds . does the department appreciate the difference ? i am disappointed by the hon . gentleman ’s remarks . he knows perfectly well that the proposition was not a prison ship . this is a ship that will be used in exactly the same way as the snp government did in scotland , and in exactly the same way as the belgian and the dutch governments are doing in their respective areas . if i may say , in edinburgh today , there are 37 asylum seekers . that is disgraceful . if the snp cared about this issue , it would step up , support asylum seekers and back our bill . people in southend west want to see a tough , but just policy on illegal immigration that stops people unfairly jumping the queue , that stops evil people smugglers and above all stops vulnerable people drowning in the channel . will my right hon . friend therefore agree that we must continue to send a strong signal that it is this government — not unelected lawyers or criminal gangs — who will decide who comes to this country ? at the core of this question is : who decides who comes to this country ? is it for the government and parliament , or is it for people smugglers and human traffickers ? those of us on the government benches know exactly which side of the debate we are on ; we want to stop the boats , and we want to secure our borders . the family of my constituent who fled sudan have been stuck in egypt for more than two months awaiting a spousal visa . four of the group of five have uk passports . can the minister tell us how long he would expect people to be waiting in this kind of situation when they have suffered such distress and anxiety ? i would be happy to look into the case for the hon . gentleman , but i can say to him that we are processing applications in third countries within service standards . we have closed the visa application centre in khartoum for obvious reasons to protect the security of our staff and contractors , but we have teams in egypt , saudi arabia and in other close countries who are there to support applicants , such as his constituents . given this morning ’s u - turn by the mayor of london on selling off uxbridge police station , does the minister believe that the mayor should also act to save barnet police station ? if he does not , the mayor ’s decision on uxbridge looks like cynical political gameplaying and interference in a by - election . i and many other londoners were concerned when , i think in 2017 , sadiq khan announced plans to close 37 police stations . thanks to the resolute campaigning of local councillor steve tuckwell in hillingdon , sadiq khan has executed a last - minute handbrake u - turn under pressure , which i am sure is entirely unconnected with the upcoming by - election . my right hon . friend is absolutely right that if sadiq khan is to have any credibility at all with londoners — he currently has pretty much none — he should reverse not just that one police station closure plan but all his police station closure plans . using the maximum police precept on council tax , having to tap into half a million pounds of reserves and yet again relying on grant funding shows that the bedfordshire police and crime commissioner has failed to secure the long - term funding that our force desperately needs . now he is off pursuing his personal ambitions as the next tory candidate for mid beds . the review of police funding is welcome , but when will the house see it ? will it be before the summer recess ? i can not set out a precise timeframe — it is being actively worked on — but i point out that festus , the police and crime commissioner for bedfordshire , is doing a fantastic job for the people of that county . it is thanks to his active , energetic , persuasive and eloquent interventions that bedfordshire has received these special grants . its base budget has also gone up by £ 6.1 million this year thanks to his fantastic work . last week , nigel farage publicised the cancellation of his bank account under the politically exposed persons regulation , but he is only the latest of a number of people to have had their lives wrecked by that regulation . recently , lords in the other place tried to correct the policy , but with only partial success , because , i understand , of pushback from the home office and the security services . will the minister explain why that is and what he will do about it ? i am delighted to be asked a question . yesterday , the treasury and the home office came together and agreed various things that were announced in the house of lords : the peps agreement . such a closure on political grounds , if that is indeed what has happened — after all , we have only the allegation of it at this point — should , therefore , be completely unacceptable . peps is there to prevent the corrupt use of banking facilities by politicians in corrupt regimes . it is not there to silence individuals who may hold views with which we may or may not agree . i call the chair of the home affairs committee . in the chief inspector of borders and immigration ’s latest report on the home office system to remove foreign national offenders , he said “ the home office does not have a firm grip on its caseworking operations ” , and “ this is no way to run a government department . ” he also said “ i found the home office ’s inability to provide reliable or consistent data and management information of particular concern . ” given that , will the minister explain how the department will cope with the increase in casework , detention and removals planned under the illegal immigration ( offences ) bill ? we take that report , as we do all others , very seriously . the right hon . lady is right to say that there are lessons to be learned . however , returns are increasing as a result of deals such as the one we have done with albania , as a result of reforms such as those we have made to the national referral mechanism and as a result of the 50 % increase in illegal working visits that we have secured this year alone . despite repeated assurances from the dispatch box and it being nearly eight months since i first raised the issue with the minister , the home office continues to operate two wholly inappropriate accommodation centres in my constituency , putting an unbearable strain on public services . will my right hon . friend expedite a clear timetable to close the centres permanently and restore the hotels to their intended purposes ? my hon . friend and i have discussed this on many occasions . she has doggedly campaigned for the closure of these centres as well as supported the steps that we are taking as a government to stop the boats in the first place . i will be happy to have further conversations with her , but she has my assurance that we are working as fast as possible to clear all hotels , including those in her constituency . last week , the government rejected a number of recommendations from the inquest into the tragic mass shooting in plymouth in 2021 , which has caused serious concern among some of the families of the victims . will the minister explain why he rejected the coroner ’s recommendations and whether all those on which he is consulting will be implemented by the end of this calendar year ? i thank the hon . gentleman for our meeting with the families a few weeks ago . as i said to him on the phone last week , whenever he and the families are ready to have further discussions with home office officials , they will be ready . the timing of that will be guided by the hon . gentleman . on the substance of the government ’s reply , we have committed to doing some things straight away . for example , the national police chiefs ’ council has been funded to set up an accredited training programme for firearms officers — that was one of the recommendations . in due course that will become mandatory . the inspectorate will conduct a thematic inspection of all firearms licensing next year . as i said to the house a few months ago , i asked it specifically to reinspect devon and cornwall ’s firearms licensing . it is doing that and it should report back by the end of july . the vast majority of the recommendations made by the coroner , the independent office for police conduct and the scottish affairs committee in connection with the isle of skye shooting are being openly and neutrally consulted on . the government do not have a position ; they will consult openly and respond once we have replies to the consultation . there were two recommendations that the hon . gentleman referred to that the government did not feel were appropriate , for the reasons set out in the document , but the vast majority are being openly consulted on . we have taken action on some of them already . i thank him again for his campaigning on this issue , which i know the families are grateful for . i recently visited uxbridge police station to hear about the valuable work its officers do to serve my constituents as well as those in uxbridge and south ruislip . when the mayor announced its closure in 2017 , hillingdon council offered to buy the site at market rate and provide a £ 500,000 revenue contribution and leaseback arrangement , so that those valuable services could continue to be available . the mayor said that that was completely impossible . other than the relentless campaigning of hillingdon conservatives and councillor steve tuckwell , could my right hon . friend suggest any reason why the mayor decided to keep it — order . mr simmonds , i think you need an adjournment debate , not a topical question . see if you can pick the bones out of that , minister . i thank my hon . friend for his excellent question . the answer is no , i can not think of anything other than the campaigning by councillor steve tuckwell and others , which forced the mayor into a last - minute , self - interested , screeching u - turn . i would like the mayor to do a u - turn on all the other police stations he is threatening with closure . you are going to be here a while yet . is the home secretary concerned by recent revelations about the investigation into the stephen lawrence murder and what happened in the brink’s - mat aftermath ? is she concerned about some of the out - of - work organisations that our police belong to ? the recent reports on the stephen lawrence case are an operational matter for the police , which i can not get involved in , nor should i. that is a judgment for the police on operational and casework decisions , within which we do not interfere . we have a good track record on the met turning around performance . mark rowley ’s turnaround plan and leadership efforts to restore confidence and rebuild trust with london are working . we need to back him to get the best results possible in london . there is a tweet going around regarding a man who identifies as a trans woman . the tweet reads that the trans - identified man who “ appeared in an @itvnews report about ‘ mothers ’ has posted an image ‘ breastfeeding ’ a baby . do you think it ’s ok to mock women like this ? ” i think that is a valid question , but i am also extremely concerned for the welfare of the child . will the home secretary ’s department look into that for me , please ? while we respect all the rights of those in the trans community , it is clear that biological men can not breastfeed . it is remarkable that we are in a position where the labour party leader can not define a woman . i think he said something like 99.9 % of women do not have a penis . on that basis , we can not rule him out from running to be labour ’s first female prime minister . my constituent sarah has been waiting more than six months for a biometric resident ’s permit , during which time she can not work , access free healthcare or leave the country . will someone do something to get her the status she deserves , so that she can go on with her life ? i would be happy to look into the case for the hon . gentleman . the number of foreign national offenders eligible for deportation has now reached a record almost 12,000 . almost 4,000 of those left prison more than five years ago and even those volunteering for deportation are still here . will the minister get a grip on the deportation department within the home office and make sure those people are chucked out of our country ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . we want those individuals to leave the country as swiftly as possible . the published figures show that fno returns increased following the pandemic — by 14 % in the latest 12 - month period ending december 2022 compared with the previous 12 - month period — but , quite clearly , there is more work to be done . liverpool is a city of sanctuary . currently , we have 237 afghan families who have been languishing in a hotel for two years . the council must rehouse the families by the minister for veterans ’ affairs , my right hon . friend the immigration minister ’s earlier claim will come as news to the labour and conservative coalition which runs north lanarkshire council and a surprise to a director of mears who confirmed to me that north lanarkshire council houses not just asylum seekers but refugees . the immigration minister has now given factually wrong information to this house three times . when will he apologise to the house , and will he come back to it to give proper information ? i do not think i have given factually wrong information . they may not be the facts the hon . gentleman wants to hear , but they are the facts . i did not mention north lanarkshire , but there are six asylum seekers there . i think the hon . gentleman would agree that there is more to be done . ( urgent question ): to ask the chancellor of the exchequer if he will make a statement on road fuel prices . from rural hamlets to coastal communities , it is a properly functioning market that ensures fair prices for motorists , but for that market to function customers need transparent data to find the best price . on that basis , when we saw fuel prices rising last summer we asked the competition and markets authority to investigate whether the market was working for customers as it should . today , the cma published its final market study report and i am shocked by its findings : rising fuel retail margins , and clear evidence of a rocket upwards and a feather downwards in the pricing pattern for diesel . it is completely unacceptable that consumers have been paying more . the financial impact of the 6p per litre increase , just in the fuel margin , from 2019 to 2022 , cost customers of the four supermarket fuel retailers £ 900 million last year alone . asda ’s fuel margin target was three times higher for this year than in 2019 and morrisons doubled over the same period . it is wrong that in a cost of living crisis drivers do not get a fair deal on fuel and end up being overcharged . motorists should not be used as cash cows by the fuel industry . the government will not stand for it and i know this house will not stand for it . therefore , we accept the cma ’s recommendations in full . we will create a statutory open data scheme for retail fuel prices and an ongoing road fuel prices monitoring function for the uk market . we will consult on the design of the open data scheme and monitoring function as soon as possible this autumn , but that is not enough . i have asked the cma to have a voluntary scheme up and running by next month and i fully expect fuel retailers to share accurate , up - to - date road fuel prices . the cma will also continue to monitor fuel prices . i demand that fuel retail bosses stop ripping off consumers , by making prices available so that the market can operate as it should . transparency is vital for competition and to keep prices down . i am extremely grateful to the minister for energy security and net zero and am delighted to see him , but i am disappointed not to see the chancellor of the exchequer . i would have thought that this was something that he cared about . the problem is that the government have stood for this over the past year . this morning , right under the government ’s nose , greedy petrol retailers imposed an additional cost of more than £ 900 million on people filling up their cars . retailers swiftly passed on price increases in the wholesale market to drivers , and the prices rocketed . yet when the wholesale prices dropped , prices were lowered only very slowly . i think we could all see that for ourselves . the rac called this “ nothing short of astounding in a cost - of - living crisis ” , which confirmed that “ supermarkets have n’t been treating drivers fairly at the pumps ” . this affects not just the cost of driving . higher road fuel prices have a knock - on effect on inflation across the economy , pushing up prices in every sector of our country . the cma makes it clear that rural areas still face the highest prices . where supermarket pumps are fewer and further between , such as in cumbria and somerset , fuel retailers are likely to have costs that are higher still . the cma found that fuel prices in rural places , such as my own in westmorland and lonsdale and in somerton and frome , are on average 1.2p per litre higher than those in urban areas . of course , in rural communities with poor public transport links , people have no choice but to drive and the distances to travel are so much greater , affecting , in particular , people who work in the care sector . once again , rural communities feel taken for granted by this government . one solution should be to expand the 5p per litre fuel duty relief scheme to those many isolated parts of cumbria that are not currently covered by it , so that families in cumbria are not left at the mercy of the most expensive fuel prices . why did the government fail to stop greedy retailers hitting families with an almost £ 1 billion excess fuel bill in the first place ? will the chancellor and the prime minister summon those company bosses to downing street and press them to return those unfair profits by lowering their prices ? will the government expand the rural fuel duty relief scheme to more areas , to support communities such as mine that are struggling with the highest petrol prices ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . he and the rac are right to highlight the particular issue in rural communities such as those that he and , indeed , i represent , and the particular pressures on consumers there . he will understand that rural fuel duty relief is a matter for the chancellor and that what we need is a properly functioning market . that is why we are implementing the findings of the cma in full and putting in place an interim regime , starting next month . i call the chair of the transport committee . towards the end of last year , the local radio station in milton keynes , mkfm , published research showing that , although there was considerable competition in milton keynes , petrol and diesel prices were substantially higher across the board than those in equivalent urban areas . i very much welcome the proposal for a real - time fuel price comparator , but will my right hon . friend assure me that the government will keep an eye on price differentials between different urban areas and intervene if necessary ? as ever , my hon . friend champions his constituency in this house . i completely agree . that is why the monitoring function is so important in tandem with transparency . we have to make sure that people can see the prices . we know that consumers are prepared to travel but , if they do not know that there is a cheaper price available 2 or 3 miles down the road , they will not access it . that is something that we aim to put right . i call the shadow minister . people across britain are facing the highest mortgage costs in europe , the highest inflation among advanced economies , and the highest tax burden in 70 years . they are paying the price for 13 years of conservative failure . in that context , it is more important than ever for the competition and markets authority to do all it can to help to bring down prices . effective competition in the interests of consumers must be at the heart of our economy . that is why we firmly support the cma ’s proposals to help to bring down the cost of fuel . ‘ filling up the tank at supermarkets is an essential part of everyday life for families and small businesses across the country , so the fact that the average annual supermarket margins on fuel increased by 6p per litre between 2019 and 2022 is deeply worrying . i am pleased to see that the secretary of state has accepted the recommendations from the cma to stop retailers artificially inflating petrol prices during a cost of living crisis ; as he says , transparency is very important . however , given that the then business secretary wrote to fuel retailers and the cma more than a year ago to highlight apparent unfairness in fuel prices , why has it taken so long for the government to take action on this issue ? motorists did not need a report to tell them that they were being fleeced by fuel retailers ; they see it every time they fill up at the pump . why did the government need to wait for the cma to tell them what everyone else knew before they took action ? in northern ireland , the consumer council published a fuel price checker in september 2020 , which has helped to keep fuel costs below those in england . why have the government taken almost three years to agree to do the same in england ? once again it is too little , too late from a government , who have again sat on their hands . i note what the minister said about an interim voluntary scheme and about consulting as soon as possible , but can he give a clear indication of when the government will introduce the change in the law that is needed to make this permanent ? the hon . lady is right to highlight the cost of living crisis and the level of taxes . that , of course , is why her party getting into power would be such a disaster for ordinary consumers and motorists throughout the country . we have come through the pandemic and made sure we have kept the country afloat ; for instance , the government supported paying nearly half of everyone ’s energy bills through the last winter . a labour government would be a threat to markets such as this , which we need to function properly , not in the way they would under labour . as for why this has taken so long , the hon . lady ought to know , having seen the disaster of her £ 28 billion energy borrowing package , which dematerialised : it was a great announcement , but it did not survive contact with reality . rose — order . i think we need to help the minister . the subject of the urgent question is road fuel prices and i think we should stick to that . i call the chair of the treasury committee . when the chancellor announced that he was cutting fuel duty by 5p a litre , which cost the exchequer billions of pounds , little did he expect that , as outlined so persuasively today by the cma , it would feed through immediately into the profits of fuel retailers — although cynical british motorists may not be surprised , because they observed it themselves on a day - to - day basis . i welcome the steps that the minister has announced , and urge him to act with greater speed in implementing them , but is he as surprised as i am that he has been asked this urgent question by the liberal democrats , who voted at their conference to hike fuel duty sharply ? i would like to say i was shocked or surprised , but i am not because — as everyone in the house knows , except the tiny number who sit on the liberal democrat bench — hypocrisy is their main method of behaviour . the initial government cut in fuel duty of 5p per litre represented savings for consumers worth about £ 2.4 billion . we on the conservative benches are on the side of the motorist . we are going to make sure that the market works and motorists are properly served by it . i call the scottish national party spokesperson . the minister says he will not stand for motorists ’ being ripped off , but that is exactly what ministers have done . the government have been complacent the whole time , following the 5p fuel duty cut . why has it taken the cma so long to establish that motorists are being gouged by 6p per litre compared with 2019 ? it reported that diesel prices are an astonishing 13p per litre higher this year alone than they should have been . that is symptomatic of the “ cost of greed ” crisis . asda received a fine for not complying with the cma investigation . that shows an astonishing level of arrogance on the part of supermarkets that are ripping off their own customers . it is estimated that we are paying nearly £ l billion a year in additional fuel costs due to the lack of competition . how does imposing an initial fine of £ 30,000 on asda work as a deterrent when it is making so much money ? i am all for an open data fuel finder scheme , but really , is that it ? i already use an app to shop around for cheaper fuel prices , so this open data will not necessarily bring competition in all areas of the uk , and reliance on an app obviously will not help those who are digitally excluded . what are the government ’s actual plans to ensure competition and reduced fuel prices , especially at motorway service stations , which are between 20p to 30p per litre more expensive ? when will we see these fuel prices come down ? that is the closest i have ever seen the hon . gentleman come to welcoming a government response , so i shall take that with me . i do not mean to try your patience any more than i already do , mr speaker , but , as i said to given corporation tax , carbon taxes , the windfall tax , fuel duties and vat , is not the bulk of the price at the pump , and of other fuels , now tax - based ? will my right hon . friend remind us of how much is tax and urge the chancellor to reduce some of those taxes to cut the cost of living ? i thank my right hon . friend for championing the consumer , as he always does . as he will be well aware , tax is a matter for the chancellor , but the whole house will have heard his passionate call to make sure that taxes are held down to the lowest amount they possibly can be . that is one more reason why we can not have the labour party taking control of the country . in march , the rac revealed that retailers are making a three times bigger margin on diesel than they were at the beginning of last year , and motorists are seeing absolutely no benefit from the chancellor ’s fuel duty cut . given the government ’s dither and delay on taking any sort of action , how does the minister feel when the government ’s flagship policy to help motorists is having little to no impact ? we are furious that these price cuts have not been passed on to consumers . that is why we asked the cma to investigate and to get further into the detail , and it is why we will implement its findings in full . as my right hon . friend is aware , i have been campaigning on the issue of fuel prices in west berkshire for about a year and a half . one thing that has been particularly disappointing is the fact that fuel prices in every single neighbouring constituency are 5 % to 8 % lower . i wrote to the cma and i am pretty disappointed to read its response today , which tells us a lot . i welcome the introduction of a real - time fuel price comparator , but such a tool already exists , albeit in a slightly clunky form . i draw the minister ’s attention to the fact that it is not enough just to tell people what the prices are at different pumps in their local area . it must be transparent to consumers whether they are in a general area that has higher or lower prices , so that their mp can make representations on what the supermarkets may be doing in that area and the cma can intervene properly . my hon . friend has been assiduous and , as she has shown with her question , focused and detailed in trying to rectify a problem that the cma has fully displayed today . it is an unusual way round , but i would be happy to meet her to discuss the matter further to make sure we put in place all the right elements , so that this transparency genuinely gets through to the consumer . there is no doubt that fuel costs are driving up inflation , especially in rural areas . i think the fuel price checker has had a dampening effect in northern ireland because the supermarkets are always aware that that they are being looked on . however , does the minister accept that his government also have a responsibility ? net zero policies , with all their associated taxes — whether it is the emissions trading scheme , green levies or fuel duties — drive up prices , too . the government have a role to play in reducing inflation as well as in transparency on supermarket prices . the right hon . gentleman is drawing the wrong conclusion from the sky - high prices of the past year or two . it is sky - high international fossil fuel prices that caused the enormous squeeze . the faster we can move to cleaner and cheaper sources of energy , the sooner we can ensure that our constituents save money and contribute to dealing with what is an ever more serious threat . having brought a ten - minute rule motion on this subject some eight years ago , i am delighted that patience has finally paid off . one issue i was raising at that time was the inequality between the prices in towns and those on motorways , which the scottish national party spokesman has mentioned . is my right hon . friend confident that the measures being brought in today will reduce those 15p or 20p premiums on road fuel prices at motorway service stations compared with normal areas ? as so often , my hon . friend has been ahead of me . the issue he raises is part of the picture ; like him , i have observed that the captive market along motorways is subject to higher prices than elsewhere . i hope that can be part of our consideration to make sure we have a system that works at its best for everybody . may i respectfully point out to the minister that this is not a town versus country or urban versus rural issue ? the rac has identified that some retailers are grossly profiteering , taking a three times bigger margin than they were at the beginning of last year , particularly on diesel sales . for the avoidance of doubt , will he confirm that the government scheme he has outlined today will apply to all fuel retailers , not just those at supermarkets ? i will write to the hon . gentleman with the precise details of everybody who will be included . he is right to highlight that this is not just an issue in urban areas . however , in those areas there tends to be more competition and easier transparency than there can be in rural and coastal areas . a couple of weeks ago , i drew the house ’s attention to the fact that the same supermarket tanker would unload fuel at 10p a litre cheaper in one place than it would if it came 10 to 15 miles up the road to my constituency . if today ’s report does not fix that , it will not have been good enough and the government will have more work to do . i hope that my right hon . friend will give me some reassurance on that point . we have to make sure the market works . transparency is our biggest single weapon , and we need to be doing this in a way that reaches people , be they digitally enabled or not ; we are wrestling with those details . let us look at the alternative to a market - based system — other countries have tried it , as it is a populist measure . it does not work , it leads to a shortage of supply and it ends up creating the very dominance that we seek to ensure is not exploited in systems such as we have seen in this cma report . transparency . the good people of bridport and dorchester in west dorset have had to pay up to 20p a litre more than those in towns not far away . the liberal democrats have been silent about that throughout the entire duration , so it is somewhat hypocritical of them to bring this matter to the house today , particularly given that they voted to increase the price per litre . although i welcome what the cma has had to say in its report today , it does not really deal with the issue we are seeing of rigorous yield management by supermarkets with their petrol prices . that is not a matter of competition ; that is where they believe they can get more money out of a particular group people or community . i would be very pleased if the minister would meet me to look at how we can take this forward and grasp that issue . i would be delighted to do so . now that we know that competition on fuel prices has weakened in recent years and that that has led to inflated prices , particularly in my constituency where , despite a campaign for fair prices led by stuart mcmillan msp , we have been paying over the odds for years , may i seek a guarantee that supermarket food prices are not following the same pattern ? following this report , the cma has decided to look into the supermarkets and will report back as soon as next month . i thank the cma for its report and the government for accepting the recommendations , although i think we are putting too much faith in price transparency to solve the market problem . i was interested to see in the trend profit margins for supermarket retailers and non - supermarket retailers that supermarkets are consistently increasing their margins while non - supermarket retailers are not . will the minister follow up with retailers , in the light of this report , to make sure that we check that the margins come down next year and in the following year ? i thank my hon . friend for his typically penetrating question . as i said , one of the recommendations is to maintain a monitoring function , which will help to give us the market intelligence so that if further intervention is required , we will have the data on which to base it . patchy public transport contributes to high costs for rural households , as many people have no choice but to use their cars for essential journeys . despite this , the rural fuel duty relief scheme does not apply to a single area in wales . will the minister commit to pressing the treasury to reconsider the scheme to take into account access to local public transport networks , as well as providing a guarantee of inclusion for welsh areas ? i thank the right hon . lady for her question and will ensure that his majesty ’s treasury is aware of it . the good people of scunthorpe spotted this issue some time ago , so i thank my right hon . friend for his work on it and the measures he is recommending . has the similar open - data scheme that has been trialled in germany resulted in a boost in competitiveness ? if so , when does my right hon . friend think we will start to see the results at the pumps here ? i hope from as soon as next month , under a voluntary scheme . my hon . friend gives me the perfect opportunity to repeat how determined i am to see the companies provide the data so that we have something far less clunky , as it has been called , and far more comprehensive than what we have today , and so that that can lead to the benefits that have been found elsewhere . i am not certain that the seriousness of the situation that faces rural constituencies is being taken appropriately into account . my angus constituents live in towns and landward areas that are miles away from supermarket fuels . they pay the highest prices for fuel , they have no public transport to speak of so have to use their cars and vehicles , they pay the highest delivery prices and they are often on the lowest wages . if the minister thinks that greater transparency over fuel prices is going to help , he is stretching the point . my constituents in angus know how expensive their fuel is and they know how far they have to travel to get cheaper fuel . this announcement will not fix the situation . we need the treasury to get its act together and intervene in what is essentially critical national infrastructure , which is what road fuel is . i will take that as a further representation to his majesty ’s treasury . motorists in and around kettering have long suspected that petrol and diesel forecourt retailers have been inflating prices well above where they should be . prices go up far too quickly and come down far too slowly . given the fact that the petrol and diesel forecourt retailers effectively ignored the letter from the business secretary in may 2022 , will the minister assure my constituents that the competition and markets authority will continue to monitor the market closely to ensure that does not happen again ? my hon . friend is quite right . urging them to behave properly is not enough , which is why we will not only put in place a mandatory system to ensure that the data is there but ensure ongoing monitoring so that , as i said to our hon . friend this is a very welcome announcement , especially in respect of the information on fuel - price competition that will allow drivers to look for fuel at petrol stations that are closer and have better prices , thereby enabling them to save money . on any potential fuel fund offers , there is an older generation — i am probably one of them — who perhaps do not use apps and therefore do not understand how they work ; what steps will the minister take to ensure that they have access to information on fuel funding that is accessible for them and easily understood so that they , too , can take advantage of what is on offer ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his question . i would not want to finish without mentioning that , as of this report clearly shows that residents in burnley and padiham and our villages have been overcharged for their fuel for too long . does my right hon . friend think that the competition and markets authority now needs to relook at the ownership changes at asda ? as the minister for energy security and net zero , that perhaps stretches slightly beyond my brief , but , as those on treasury bench will have heard my hon . friend ’s question , i am sure that he will be able follow up with others who have direct responsibility . i wish to thank the secretary of state for health and social care for coming to the chamber to make his statement . it is a pity that the prime minister did not do so on friday when the world heard what he had to say before we did . the prime minister is a member of parliament . he is answerable to the members of parliament from all political parties . i have to say that his behaviour was not acceptable . he may be the prime minister , but the members of parliament should hear first . i am very pleased that the secretary of state is doing it the right way . the government note the comments that you have made from the chair , mr speaker . i would love them to take what i have said on board . that is also noted , mr speaker . may i , on behalf of the government , note the passing of the former head of the civil service , lord kerslake ? he had a distinguished career in public service , including as chief executive of sheffield council and chair of king ’s college hospital nhs foundation trust , as well as being head of the civil service . we send our condolences to his family and friends both in whitehall and across the civil service . with permission , mr speaker , i wish to make a statement on our long - term workforce plan for the nhs . this week marks the 75th birthday of the nhs . we should celebrate its achievements , its founding principles and its people . from doctors and dentists to pharmacists and physios , nhs staff devote their lives to caring for others . i am sure the whole house would agree that the nhs holds a special place in our country due to the care offered by the people who work for it . it is said that , in 1948 , the nhs had fewer than 150,000 staff and a budget of around £ 11 billion . today , the nhs employs closer to 1.4 million people with a budget of more than £ 160 billion . the transformation of the care offered by the nhs through advances in medicine is reflected in the fact that people now live 13 years longer than on average in 1948 . today , alongside the increase in the number of staff , the range of treatments and the improved patient outcomes , demand on the nhs has also increased . people live longer , they live with more complex medical conditions , and we are also dealing with the challenges left behind by a once - in - a - generation pandemic . one in four adults lives with two or more health conditions . although our population is forecast to grow by around 4 % over the next 15 years , the number of those over 85 is forecast to grow by more than 50 % . in addressing the challenges both of today and of the longer term , it is right that we have a recovery plan focused on the immediate steps as we rebuild from the pandemic , and longer - term plans to ensure that the nhs is sustainable for the future . this will ensure that the nhs is there for future generations in the way that it has been for us and our families over the past 75 years . we have already set out detailed recovery plans to reduce long waits for operations , improve access to urgent and emergency care and make it easier to see gps and specialists in primary care . on electives , we have virtually eliminated the two - year wait , which we did this summer , and cleared more than 90 % of 80 - week waits from their peak at the end of march — in marked contrast to the much longer waits we see in wales , where the nhs is run by labour . on urgent and emergency care , we are investing £ 1 billion in 5,000 additional permanent beds , alongside expanding virtual wards to improve discharge from hospital and investing in community services to prevent admissions , especially for the frail and elderly . on primary care , we are investing more than £ 600 million , including in improving technology to address the 8 am rush . we have already exceeded our manifesto target by 3,000 , with 29,000 additional roles in primary care to enable patients to access specialists more quickly , and we are reducing burdens on gp surgeries through the development of the nhs app and improving the range of services offered through pharmacy first , enabling pharmacists to prescribe drug treatments for seven minor illnesses . alongside the recovery plans , we are taking action to improve prevention through early diagnosis of conditions , whether through the 108 community diagnostic centres that are already open , or the 43 new and expanded surgical hubs planned for this year . our national roll - out of our lung cancer screening programme has helped to transform patient outcomes , turning on its head the previous position where 80 % of lung cancers in our most deprived communities were detected late , with 76 % now being detected early . alongside the immediate measures we are taking to deal with demand in the nhs , as we celebrate the 75th anniversary we are also investing in the nhs to make sure it is sustainable for the future . last month , i announced to the house the largest - ever investment in the nhs estate , with more than £ 20 billion committed to our new hospitals programme . today i can confirm to the house that , for the first time in the nhs ’s history , the government have committed to publishing a long - term workforce plan , setting out the largest - ever workforce training expansion in the nhs ’s history , backed by £ 2.4 billion of new funding . the plan responds to requests from nhs leaders and has been developed by nhs england . i would like to take this opportunity to thank amanda pritchard , the chief executive of nhs england and her team , gavin larner and colleagues within the department of health and social care , and the more than 60 nhs organisations that have engaged closely in the plan ’s development , including many of our royal colleges . the plan sets out three priorities : to train more staff , to retain and develop the staff already working for the nhs and to reform how training is delivered , taking on board the best of international practice . let me deal with each in turn . we will double the number of medical school places , increase the availability of gps being trained by 50 % , train 24,000 more nurses and midwives and increase the number of dentists by 40 % . when it comes to improving retention , we recognise the importance of flexible working opportunities , especially for those approaching retirement . the plan will build on proposals in the nhs people plan and build on steps already taken by the chancellor at the spring budget on pension tax reform . in respect of reform , the plan sets out policies to expand the number of associate roles , which provide greater career progression for existing staff and in turn reduce the workload of senior clinicians , allowing them to focus on the work that only they can do . both measures will improve productivity by enabling more staff to operate at the top of their licence . a constant theme across the long - term workforce plan is our focus on apprenticeships and vocational training , including a commitment to increasing the number of staff coming through apprenticeships from 7 % today to 22 % by 2031 - 32 . that reflects the strong commitment of the secretary of state for education and myself to facilitate greater career progression through apprenticeships . it will also help to recruit and retain staff in parts of the country that often find it harder to recruit in the week in which we celebrate the 75th anniversary of the nhs , today ’s announcement confirms the government ’s commitment to the first ever comprehensive nhs long - term workforce plan . the plan sets out detailed proposals to train more staff , offers greater flexibility and opportunity to existing staff , and embraces innovation by reforming how education and training are delivered across the nhs . the plan will be iterative ; we will return to it every couple of years to enable progress to reflect advances in technology such as artificial intelligence so that the numbers trained can be best aligned with patient services . it also reflects a growing need for more general skills in the nhs , as patients with more than one condition require a more holistic approach . the nhs long - term plan , backed by £ 2.4 billion of new funding , comes in addition to our record investment in the nhs estate . it ensures that we put in place the funding required for a sustainable future for the nhs , alongside the steps that we are taking in the immediate term to reduce waiting lists and ensure that the nhs is there for patients . as the chief executive of nhs england has said herself , the long - term workforce plan is a truly historic moment for the nhs . as such , i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow minister . i thank the health secretary for advance sight of his statement . i say “ statement ” , but what i really mean is “ admission”—an admission that , after 13 long years , the conservatives have run out of road , run out of ideas , and turned to labour to clear up the mess that they have made . make no mistake : at its heart , this is labour ’s workforce plan . it is a plan that we have called for since last september ; a plan that we have begged the government to adopt again and again . they say that imitation is sincerest form of flattery , and i , for one , am relieved that the government have finally seen sense , but the question that the health secretary and conservative members need to answer today is : what on earth took them so long ? this week , the nhs celebrates its 75th anniversary as it faces the biggest crisis in its history — a crisis that has been building for years under this government : a staff shortage of 154,000 , 7.4 million patients stuck waiting for treatment , people across the country finding it virtually impossible to see a gp , and families desperately worried that if they need an emergency ambulance , it just will not arrive on time . ministers constantly blame covid for those problems , but the truth is that waiting list numbers were rising and staff shortages increasing long before the pandemic struck . patients now want to know when they will finally see a difference . can the health secretary confirm that , under his proposals , the nhs will not have the staff that it needs for at least eight years ? does he now regret the cut in medical school places that his government brought in in 2013 ? does he regret the decision taken last summer to cut the number of medical school places by 3,000 just when the nhs needed them most ? the health secretary claims that this is the first long - term nhs workforce plan , but let me set the record straight . in 2000 , the last labour government produced a 10 - year plan of investment and reform — a plan that delivered not only 44,000 more doctors and 75,000 more nurses , but the lowest - ever waiting times and the highest - ever patient satisfaction in the history of the nhs . that was a golden inheritance that conservative members can only dream of and that they have squandered through a decade of inaction and incompetence . let me turn briefly to what is missing from the proposals . without a serious strategy to keep staff working in the nhs , ministers will be forever running to catch up with themselves . yet the secretary of state has completely failed to put forward a proper plan to end the crippling strikes that are having such a huge impact on patient care . six hundred and fifty thousand operations and appointments have been cancelled because of industrial action . next week , junior doctors will walk out for five days , followed by two days of consultants ’ strikes . after seven months of disruption , can the health secretary tell us when he and the prime minister will finally do their job , sit down and negotiate with staff , and bring an end to this tory chaos ? the one part of labour ’s workforce plan that ministers have not stolen is our plan to fund it by scrapping the non - dom tax status . in fact , when the health secretary was touring the media studios yesterday , he was asked nine times how he was going to pay for the plan and he completely failed to answer . he has had a little more time to prepare , so i am going to try again . will he fund it through higher taxes , when we already have the highest tax burden for 70 years , or will he fund it through higher borrowing , when our nation ’s debt is at record levels ? labour will introduce plans only when we can show how they will be paid for , because that is what taxpayers deserve . it is high time that conservatives did the same . from the windfall tax to help for mortgage holders to a proper plan for the nhs workforce , where labour leads , the conservatives only follow . this tired , discredited government have had their day . the public know that it is time for change , and in their hearts government members too know that it is time for change . it is time for them to move aside and let labour finally deliver . well , that really was a confused response . the hon . lady began with reference to labour ’s proposals and the claim that our plan followed them . i took the precaution of bringing labour ’s announcement with me to the chamber . members can look at it in their own time , but it does not use the word “ reform ” once , despite the fact that “ train , retain , reform ” is a key part of our proposals . proposals for reform include moving from five - year to four - year medical undergraduate training ; the expansion of roles such as physician associate ; a significant expansion in the use of apprenticeships ; and flexibility for retiring consultants , so that they can return to roles in , for example , out - patient services . a wide range of reforms came about as a result of the consultation with 60 different nhs organisations and are a key feature of the plan , but in labour ’s proposals reform is not mentioned once . in addition , labour ’s proposals are for a 10 - year period . our plan covers 15 years . its proposal covered 23,000 additional health roles ; our proposal deals with 50,000 . i could go on and talk about the fact that the labour proposal does not even mention gp trainees . labour members keep coming to the house and saying that primary care is important , but their proposals did not even touch on the workforce with regard to gps . they did not even mention pharmacists , even though , as part of a primary care recovery plan , a key chunk of our proposal is pharmacy first . it is extremely important that we can deliver services to patients in innovative ways . the ultimate irony is that the shadow health secretary , in one of his many interviews , including interviews to promote his book , said that the nhs “ must reform or die ” . he said that it must reform , yet labour ’s proposals do not mention reform at all . labour welcomes the plan , but it goes on to say that it will take too long to implement , while claiming that it is its plan , which , again , points to the confusion among labour members . let me remind the house of what has been done . we had a manifesto commitment for 50,000 additional nurses — we are on track to deliver that , with 44,000 in place . we had a manifesto commitment to have 26,000 additional roles in primary care , and we have met that , with 29,000 roles in place . in 2018 , we made a commitment to five new medical schools in parts of the country where it is hard to recruit . we have delivered that — a 25 % expansion in the number of medical students , who will come on stream in hospitals next summer . however , as we celebrate the 75th anniversary of the nhs , it is right that we also look beyond that to the longer - term needs of the nhs . that is exactly what the plan does with its doubling of medical places , but alongside that , it innovates by embracing things like a medical apprenticeship so that we can look at different ways of delivering training . the hon . lady talked about strikes , which is a further area of confusion on the labour benches . labour members say that they do not support a 35 % pay rise for junior doctors , on the grounds that the shadow chancellor , i will finish with one final area of confusion on the labour benches . the hon . lady talked about the elastic non - dom revenue raiser , despite the fact that the former shadow chancellor , ed balls , has said that it would not raise the funds that are claimed . he has said that it would do quite the opposite : it would deter investment in the uk . in addition , labour has already spent those funds on a range of measures , such as the breakfast clubs that labour members come to the house and talk about . the reality is that it would not fund labour ’s proposals , whereas we have made a commitment to back our plan with £ 2.4 billion of funding from the treasury . this is a historic moment as we celebrate the 75th anniversary of the nhs . it is a long - term commitment from a government who are backing the nhs through the biggest investment in the nhs estate — over £ 20 billion — and a series of recovery programmes , expanding our diagnostic capacity and our surgical hubs . that is why the workforce plan is truly innovative . it does not just train more staff or offer opportunities to retain more staff ; it reforms as well — something that is sadly lacking in labour ’s proposals . i call the chair of the select committee . this is a serious piece of work , and it is very welcome . despite calls from people like me to get on with it , it was right for the government to take their time and get it right . the select committee will scrutinise it — as we do — on the training piece is very strong . doubling the number of medical school places has to be right , and i am glad that the secretary of state thought of it . on retention , if we are saying — rightly , i would contest — that it is not all about pay , what role does he envisage the integrated care systems and , therefore , the trusts having in supporting staff as he makes the “ one workforce ” that is mentioned in section 5 , with which i agree , come to pass ? characteristically , my hon . friend the chair of the health and social care committee makes an extremely pertinent point about the role of the icss . as we move to place - based commissioning and look to integrate more , the interplay between the workforces in the nhs and in social care will be a key area where the icss will be extremely important . the icss will have a particular role in the apprenticeship and vocational training , which are key retention tools in those parts of the country where it is hard to recruit , as well as in offering more flexibility to staff . when i talk to nhs staff , they often talk about having different needs at different stages of their career — whether for childcare commitments , which relate to the measures the chancellor set out in the budget , caring for an elderly relative , or wanting to retire and work in more flexible ways — and the icss have a key role to play in that . i welcome my hon . friend ’s comment that this is a serious and complex piece of work , and that it was right that we took our time to get it correct . despite the significant desert of dentists , i note from the plan that we will not see an increase in dental training places next year , the year after or the year after that , meaning that we will not see more dentists for nearly another decade . we have a crisis now , so what is the secretary of state going to do about it ? we are already seeing a fifth more work than last year , due to the flexibilities that the under - secretary of state for health and social care , my hon . friend i welcome the workforce plan and applaud nhs england ’s ambition . however , for the plan to be successful , it is vital that we promote career options that often go unseen . i therefore urge my right hon . friend to work with the education secretary and nhs england to ensure that young people are better informed about the myriad opportunities in the allied health professions and as healthcare scientists before choosing gcse , a - level or university options . my hon . friend raises a brilliant point . i do not know if members know , but there are 350 different types of role in the nhs . it is really important that we get the right information to children whose parents are perhaps not informed about those opportunities . one point on which i slightly take issue with my hon . friend is that it is not just those at the start of their career who need to be aware of the opportunities . this is about offering opportunities to people throughout their careers to progress and to take on more advanced roles . i strongly believe that we should not define people ’s future career by where they are at 21 or 22 ; they should have the opportunity to progress . that is a key part of the workforce plan , and i think it is a key conservative principle that they have that ladder of opportunity throughout their time in the nhs . i associate myself with the remarks the secretary of state made about bob kerslake . he was a true public servant , and his death is our loss . what is the point of a workforce plan if the secretary of state is not actually talking to the workforce ? when will he talk to the junior doctors and the consultants ? can i also ask whether the work on the workforce plan will start forthwith or sometime in the future ? the fact that we are talking to the workforce is shown by the fact that we have reached agreement with the largest workforce group in the nhs . indicated dissent . the right hon . lady , for whom i have a huge amount of respect , is shaking her head , but it is a fact that the largest workforce group in the nhs are those on “ agenda for change ” , which covers more than 1 million healthcare workers from nurses , midwifes and paramedics through to porters , cleaners and many others . we have reached agreement with the nhs staff council , and those sums — the 5 % , plus the lump sum in recognition of their tremendous work — is going into pay packets this month . so we have reached agreement , notwithstanding discussions with the junior doctors . they still demand 35 % , and that is not affordable . i welcome this long - term plan , particularly its recognition that the skillsets required in the nhs over the next 10 or 15 years , with the requirement for multidisciplinary working and generalised clinical skills , are going to change . does my right hon . friend agree that two things are needed for implementation ? one is to improve the sense of culture in the nhs , which could lead to better retention . the second element is to ensure that digital innovation , particularly the use of artificial intelligence to improve clinical skills and other skills , is rolled out more generally in the nhs . we need to diffuse that innovation a lot more to support the critical new skillsets that are required for a modern health service . my hon . friend is exactly right . as a former health minister , he knows these issues extremely well . there is a requirement — this is something the chief medical officer , professor sir chris whitty , has spoken about — for more generalist skills in the nhs , not least given that one in four adults now has two or more health conditions . we need flexibility to respond to changes not just in technology , but in service design , which will evolve as well . my hon . friend is also right about the wider issues of culture . i think the whole house was concerned about recent reports of sexual assaults linked to the nhs . one of the key features of the agreement we have reached with the nhs staff council is to work more in partnership on violence against members of nhs staff . i know there will be consensus in the house that that is unacceptable , so we are working with trade union colleagues on how we tackle it . again , with racism , we still have too many cases of concern . there are a number of areas of culture that we are working constructively with trade union colleagues and others to address . i thank the secretary of state for his comments about bob kerslake , whose spell in public service included his time as chief executive of sheffield city council . he continued to have many roles in the city , where he will be much missed . after this government ’s 13 years in charge , morale in the nhs is clearly at rock bottom , with the value of pay falling , pressures increasing and a record number of staff — almost 170,000 — leaving the nhs last year . the ceo of nhs providers said that that must be reversed , but all the secretary of state talks about is a little bit of working flexibility . does he recognise that he has to address the crisis in morale to stem the tide of people leaving the nhs ? it is simply not correct to say that this is simply about flexibility — for example , look at the very significant changes made on pension tax . that was the no.1 demand of the british medical association consultants committee , and the government agreed to it . a significant amount of work is going on . the nhs people plan talked about not just flexibility but some of the cultural points that are important . some roles that have been introduced need to expand , such as some of the advanced positions like advanced clinical nurse or physician associate , where there are opportunities for people to progress their careers . it is worth pointing out that , once again , not a single welsh labour mp has turned up to defend their party ’s record in wales . as we set out a long - term workforce plan , we are setting out that ambition for england , but we see very little from the labour party in wales . i congratulate my right hon . friend on this welcome announcement . i was happy to join his celebration of the 75th anniversary in the most practical way by visiting the new children ’s emergency department at the william harvey hospital in my constituency . it is opening for patients this week and will be extremely welcome . he will be aware that some of the problems of the nhs can be solved only if we solve problems in the social care system as well . i urge him to follow up this extremely useful and welcome workforce plan for nhs workers with a similar idea for the social care system , because unless we fix one , we will not fix the other . my right hon . friend makes a valid point about the integration between health and social care , and that was a flagship part of the reforms in 2022 , which brought the nhs and social care together through the integrated care system . i join him in welcoming the news about william harvey hospital , which is extremely important to the local area . on social care more widely , we must also be cognisant of the differences . the nhs and social care employ roughly similar numbers at around 1.5 million people , but one is one employer and the other is 15,000 employers , so the dynamics between the two are different . the prioritisation of that integration is exactly right . that is why my right hon . friend the chancellor announced up to £ 7.5 billion for social care in the autumn statement , recognising that what happens in social care has a big impact on discharge in hospitals and hospital flow , which in turn impacts on ambulance handovers . after promises of new hospitals that have not got off the ground and 6,000 more gps that never came to pass , it is fair to say that the british public will judge the government on their actions not their words . let me press the secretary of state further on social care . he will remember that at the start of this year , people were dying in the back of ambulances and in hospital corridors , in part because people could not be discharged from hospitals into social care . if the government believe , as i do , that we can not fix the nhs if we do not fix social care , will he also bring forward a workforce plan for our social care sector ? that repeats the previous question , so i will not repeat the answer . it is slightly ironic to call for a plan for a new hospital programme and for a long - term workforce plan , and then criticise us when we deliver on both of those , as we have done with more than £ 20 billion of investment in the new hospitals programme , which we announced last month , £ 2.4 billion in the first ever long - term workforce plan and the biggest ever expansion of workforce training in the history of the nhs . of course we need to take action in the short term to deal with the consequences of the pandemic . that is what our recovery plan does . the urgent emergency care plan that i announced in january takes specific action on demand management in the community . there are measures upstream on boosting capacity in emergency departments and downstream on things such as virtual wards . a huge amount of work is going on . we are putting more than £ 1 billion into 5,000 more permanent beds to get more bed capacity into hospitals . on social care , in the autumn statement the chancellor committed up to £ 7.5 billion of further investment over two years , and it was part of our reforms to better integrate health and social care . i welcome the nhs long - term workforce plan and in particular its emphasis on training , retention and reform . at the moment , about a quarter of nhs staff are recruited from abroad . can the secretary of state confirm to the house and my constituents that this plan enables the development of a strong pool of homegrown talent , so that we can reduce foreign recruitment more towards 10 % , which would be a lot more sustainable for the long - term future of the nhs ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . as we boost our domestic workforce training , there will be scope to reduce the number recruited internationally . from 1948 onwards , international recruitment has always played an important role in the nhs , and we are hugely grateful for the service offered by those recruited internationally , but we also recognise that as demography changes in other countries , there will be increasing competition for healthcare workers around the world , so it is right that we boost our domestic supply . that is what this plan does , and it is why this is a historic moment for the nhs in making that long - term commitment that will in turn reduce the demand on the international workforce . i , too , add my condolences to the family of bob kerslake , who did excellent work in my borough tackling poverty . i would congratulate the secretary of state on this announcement if it did not come 13 years into a conservative government . it is a bit like bobby ewing coming out of the shower , the way the secretary of state is saying , “ i ’ve just realised there ’s a crisis in the nhs . ” we went into covid with 2.4 million people on waiting lists , which was a record . it is now up to 7.4 million . the report itself says that we have 154,000 fewer staff than we need today in the nhs . after 13 years in government , if the tories really cared about the nhs , it would not be in the state it is in , would it ? the hon . gentleman ignores the fact that since 2010 , there has been a 25 % increase in the nhs workforce . more than a quarter of a million more people now work in the nhs than was the case in 2010 . there is a 50 % increase in the number of consultants working in the nhs today compared with 2010 , but the reality is that demand has increased as a result of an older population , advances in medicine and in particular the demands of the pandemic , and that is what we are responding to . we are also taking measures in parallel . we are on track to deliver our manifesto commitment for 50,000 more nurses , with 44,000 now in place . we also have beaten our manifesto target on primary care , with 29,000 additional roles in place . that means that people can get to the specialist they need , which in turn frees up gps for those things that only gps can do and ensures that patients can access care much more quickly . according to the king ’s fund , the proportion of gdp taken by the nhs has increased in the past 50 years from 3.4 % to 8.2 % . on the same trajectory , in 50 years ’ time , it will take a fifth of all our gdp . that is totally unsustainable , especially as someone ’s only right , despite the fact they are paying ever increasing amounts of tax , is to join the back of the queue . i ask again : will the secretary of state launch a study — and , if necessary , appoint a royal commission — on fundamental reform of the whole nature and funding of our health system , so that we can learn from every other developed country , such as australia , france , italy and germany , where they unleash private sector investment into healthcare and give people rights to their healthcare , while ensuring that those who need it get free healthcare at the point of delivery ? i hope my right hon . friend is pleased to see the measures we are taking with the lord o’shaughnessy review on clinical research trials to make it easier and faster to do research in the nhs . that in turn attracts private investment to the nhs . he will have seen the announcement i made on tuesday of £ 96 million for 93 different research projects , such as at great ormond street hospital , where we have allocated £ 3.5 million for research into rare conditions in children . that translates into research that is then deployed , usually in adults . we are investing there , and we are screening 100,000 children through genomics england . we have got a deal with moderna and biontech so that we can have bespoke cancer vaccines . on monday , we rolled out national lung cancer screening . previously , in our most deprived communities we were detecting lung cancer late—80 % were diagnosed late — but in those pilots we turned that on its head with 76 % detected earlier . i know that my right hon . friend , as a former chair of the public accounts committee , will agree that by detecting earlier , not only are patient outcomes far better but treatment is far cheaper , whether that is for lung cancer or through our innovation on hiv screening in emergency departments picking up hiv in people who do not realise that they have it . when we treat it early , the patient outcomes are better , and it is fiscally much more sustainable . that is how we will address some of his concerns . the secretary of state could do something now — not in eight years ’ time — to relieve the pressure on our nhs , and it has nothing to do with pension funds . figures from the royal college of general practitioners show that 53 % of gps think they can not work in a flexible way to balance family and work commitments . it is little wonder that gps aged 35 to 44 are the biggest group on the retention scheme who are leaving the profession — it does not take a rocket scientist to work out that it is the mums . when i asked the secretary of state ’s department what he was doing to monitor flexible working and whether we are getting roles that people can do — not just sitting with their 16 hours but finding ways to work and balance family — it said that it did not monitor the situation . it was not even looking at it . we are losing brilliant staff and wasting billions of pounds , and we will have a delay before our constituents see the benefit of any workforce plan unless that changes . i have listened to him and looked at the statement that does not make a single mention of childcare , although he did refer to it in passing . what will he actually do not just for retirees but for doctors with families to get them back into the nhs so that we can all benefit ? i think there is actually a lot of agreement between the hon . lady and i. she talked about the plan , and having read it a number of times — that is part of my role — i know that childcare is specifically referred to in the summary , no less , in terms of the key issues that it goes on to set out . it goes into detail about our proposals , including linking up to the nhs people plan and greater flexibility in terms of roles and people retiring . one aspect of the nhs staff council deal is the expansion of pension abatement rules . so there is a huge amount . the hon . lady calls for more flexibility . i set out a number of the areas , and she does not seem to realise that there are three sections to the plan , with the second being all about giving greater flexibility to help retain our staff . so the plan addresses the points she raises ; that just does not seem to be the answer she wants to hear . as for flexibility being important to mums , yes it is , and the nhs has a largely female workforce , but it is also important to dads . it is important to all nhs staff that we have that flexibility . the nhs today , at 1.4 million employees , is the fifth - largest employer in the world , and if the ambitions in this welcome plan are met , it will be the largest employer in the world . that raises the question of how effective the management of those human resources is . it is a little disappointing that there is so little commentary in the plan on two important management issues : the ambitions on improving the quality of management systems , and particularly clarification of decision rights and responsibilities ; and the quality of accounting control systems and how the nhs seeks to improve them . will my right hon . friend ensure that the nhs looks at those two important matters ? those are both fair points . i know that my hon . friend comes at this with great commercial experience , and i hope he knows that i have an interest in those issues . just to reassure him , the plan is iterative ; it is not a one - off . it is a framework from which we will do further work . indeed , one of the areas that i am often criticised for is my interest in data and variation in data across the nhs — he and i probably agree on that more than some of those who are critical . that speaks to his point — the chair of the health and social care committee ’s point relates to this — that in a system the size of the nhs , data on the performance of the integrated care boards and their role in terms of the workforce is one area that the house will want to return to . we know a government are out of ideas when they copy the opposition ’s plan to train the doctors and nurses that the nhs so desperately needs . the majority of those policies will not be implemented until after the general election — long after the british public have booted the conservatives out of power because of their industrial - scale incompetence , which included crashing the economy . the secretary of state will be aware that the nhs is short of more than 150,000 staff right now . will he take responsibility for those shortages and admit that , had the government acted more than a decade ago , the nhs would have the staff that it needs right now ? all i can say is that the hon . gentleman clearly has not read the plan . if he had , he would have seen that it is developed by nhs england . that the labour party is claiming authorship of it is slightly odd . as i pointed out in response to the shadow health minister , we have a superb new accident and emergency in scunthorpe , and we are pressing ahead with plans for a large , state - of - the - art community diagnostic centre . i have lived locally all my life , and those are some of the most significant upgrades we have seen in a generation . but there are things to do — we certainly need more nhs dentists . would the secretary of state consider a tie - in so that newly qualified dentists spend a minimum percentage of their time delivering nhs care ? i am pleased to see those services going into scunthorpe . that underscores the investment we are making now while preparing for the long term , through the largest ever expansion in workforce training in the nhs ’s history . my hon . friend is right about the importance of tie - ins . let me explain why that matters in particular for dentists : around two thirds of dentists do not go on to do nhs work . that is why the plan has looked at tie - ins for dentistry , which we will explore in the weeks and months ahead.[official report , despite what the secretary of state says , the conservatives have finally admitted that they are out of ideas , and are adopting labour ’s workforce plan . the nhs is short of more than 150,000 staff right now . more worryingly , the plan includes no mention of eye health , despite the crisis . in ophthalmology , 80 % of eye units do not have enough consultants to meet current demand . will the secretary of state say how many years it will take for the nhs to have enough ophthalmologists ? why will he not back my bill for a national eye health strategy for england , which will seek to tackle the crisis in eye health ? the question started by saying that we do not want plans for the future , we want to deal with the present , and finished by asking if we can have a plan for the future rather than for the present . the plan sets out significant additional numbers . significant investment is going into eye services here and now . let me give the house one example : at king ’s lynn hospital , in addition to our investment in a new hospital to replace the reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete hospital , and in addition to the new diagnostic centre , i had the opportunity in the summer to open a new £ 3 million eye centre , which is doubling the number of patients who receive eye care in king ’s lynn . that is just one practical example of our investment in eye services now . may i add my words of condolence for lord kerslake , who served on the greater grimsby regeneration board , which oversees regeneration in the grimsby - cleethorpes area ? we greatly valued his experience and advice . following the question from my hon . friend the under - secretary of state for health and social care , my hon . friend i welcome the secretary of state ’s statement and the positivity he is trying to bring forward . the nhs workforce plan has concluded that the number of places in medical schools each year will rise from some 7,500 to 10,000 , but in northern ireland it is a very different story : i know it is a devolved matter , but the royal college of nursing is facing cuts that could result in the number of places falling to 1,025 per academic year . will the extra money that the secretary of state announced be subject to barnett consequentials ? i know he is always keen to promote all this great united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland together , so what discussions has he had with the northern ireland department of health and the northern ireland assembly to ensure that northern ireland is not left behind ? when we are crying out for staff , our students should have a real opportunity to learn and work in the nhs field . barnett consequentials will apply to the £ 2.4 billion funding over the five years . in respect of new roles , regulatory changes apply on a uk - wide basis . the plan itself is for the nhs in england , but we stand ready to work with partners across the united kingdom where there is shared learning on which we can work together . i am really pleased to see the 50 % increase in the number of annual training places for gps — it is music to my ears — but they will need somewhere to work . the £ 20 billion for the hospital programme is great , but when i look at section 106 applications for my constituency , i still see health getting a tiny proportion compared with education and the environment . may i have an assurance from the secretary of state that as we increase the number of gps in the primary care team , they will not have to scrabble around trying to get little bits of money for planning applications here and there , but that there will be a guaranteed capital budget for new doctors , in the way that we are sorting that out for hospitals ? my hon . friend raises a perfectly valid point . as we expand the primary care workforce , there is a capital consequence . the 50 % expansion he talks about builds on the expansion from 2,100 in training in 2014 to 4,000 now , so there has already been an expansion , but we are taking that further by 50%—and on the higher figure . his point about section 106 applications is absolutely valid , and that is part of the primary care recovery plan . i understand that he is discussing the importance of getting that funding in place with the under - secretary of state for health and social care , my hon . friend the member for harborough . given the number of pressures and crises that our nhs faces , it would be a mistake for the secretary of state to be seen as complacent in how he delivered his workforce plan . our job as mps is to speak the truth to power , so i want to raise with him the lack of cancer treatment capacity , particularly in radiotherapy . international comparators suggest that between 55 % and 60 % of cancer patients should be able to access radiotherapy either directly or in tandem with other treatments . currently , only 27 % do . what is the secretary of state doing to increase the size of the highly specialised and relatively small radiotherapy workforce ? the target is for 85 % of patients to start their first treatment within 62 days of an urgent gp referral . what is the current figure ? to take the hon . gentleman ’s first point , the plan does not get into individual specialties . that was a health committee recommendation , which i have discussed with the committee ’s chair , my hon . friend the hon . gentleman made a perfectly valid point about boosting capacity . we have already rolled out 108 of the 160 community diagnostic centres that we have committed to deliver . we are also looking to innovate , and i will give two practical examples . our deal with moderna , which is looking at individual bespoke vaccines for hard to treat cancers such as pancreatic cancer , will allow us to get ahead on that . we are already seeing a significant reduction in cervical cancer as a result of prevention measures . likewise , by going into deprived communities with a high preponderance of smoking , the lung cancer screening programme is detecting lung cancer , which often presents late , much earlier , which in turn is having a significant impact on survival rates . i recently met a constituent who raised the issue of children ’s oral health and shared with me her concerns about the staffing crisis in specialist paediatric dentistry . according to the government ’s own statistics , which were released in march , 29.3 % of five - year - olds in england have enamel and/or dentinal decay , and the figure was as high as 38.7 % in the north - west . the workforce plan talks of expanding dentistry training places by 24 % by 2028 - 29 , and by 40 % by 2031 - 32 . i note the secretary of state ’s response to my hon . friend without repeating my previous answer on specialty , we are boosting a number of areas . there are 5,000 more doctors and almost 13,000 more nurses this year than last year . i have already touched on increasing the numbers in primary care . there are 44,000 more nurses , so we are on track to deliver our manifesto target of 50,000 . there are 25 % more within the workforce of the nhs compared with 2010 . we are boosting the workforce overall . the plan is iterative and further work will go into which specialities are developed and how resource is prioritised as services are redesigned . the secretary of state will be aware that the recruitment and retention issues facing the nhs are particularly bad in rural areas . we felt the brunt of that in north shropshire , with some of the worst ambulance waiting times , cancer treatment rates and diabetic care rates in the country . the plan does not go into much detail on what will be done to help rural areas , but it does acknowledge that by 2037 , a third of all over-85s will live in rural places . i urge the secretary of state to rural - proof this plan and to find ways to work on both the retention and the recruitment of healthcare professionals across the whole spectrum in north shropshire and the rest of rural britain . the hon . lady raises a fair point . it also applies to the issue of stroke . the elderly population has increased in many coastal and rural communities . that has created significant pressure : for legacy reasons , services are often in other parts of the country . we have five new medical schools in place , and we have looked at those parts of the country where it is often hard to recruit . part of the expansion will be to look further at what services are needed in different areas . the hon . lady ’s point also speaks to that raised by the chair of the health and social care committee . by giving greater autonomy to place - based commissioning through the integrated care systems , we will enable people at a more local level to design the services and the workforce that they need , and that includes the flexibilities required to retain local staff . i welcome the workforce plan . given that it has taken 13 years , one tends to wonder why it has taken so long , but then of course we remember that there is a general election on the horizon . page 121 sets out a labour productivity rate of 1.5 % to 2 % per year . that has never been achieved by the nhs or any other comparable health system , so what assumptions is the health and social care secretary making in relation to achieving that ? first , this is a plan developed by colleagues in nhs england , so these are assumptions that have been agreed by those who lead within the nhs . it is about ensuring that people operate at the top of their licence . it is about having new and expanded roles , such as advanced practitioners and associate roles , that allow people to progress in their careers and , in doing so , freeing up capacity for senior clinicians , who often spend time doing things that do not need to be done by people in those roles . of course , there are also rapid changes in technology . we often talk about the developments in artificial intelligence , and i have touched on developments in the life sciences industry . i have also mentioned advances in screening and genomics . all those developments will in turn help us to prevent health conditions , and treating those conditions early will be not only better for the patient , but better value for money for the taxpayer . i thank the secretary of state for his statement , and for responding to questions for 59 minutes . on a point of order , mr deputy speaker . it concerns the status of the economic activity of public bodies ( overseas matters ) bill . , which we are about to discuss . it occurred to me during my examination of the bill that there is , at the very least , a prima facie case that it is a hybrid bill because of the private interests engaged alongside its public elements . a number of classes of people are particularly affected . the private rights of all the groups in our society who are advocating for palestinian rights will be affected in one way or another by the suppression of their ability to express their points of view , and that will absolutely apply to administrators of public funds . those who manage local government pension schemes , for example , as well as the members of those schemes , will not be able to invest in a way that is free , particularly in respect of the state of israel , the occupied golan heights and the occupied palestinian territories , because of the exemption contained in the bill . local councillors will be similarly affected when it comes to expressing their points of view about the merits of being able to exercise power over economic assets for which they are democratically accountable . muslims in the uk who support human rights in palestine will also be disproportionately affected . i have submitted a longer note on the basis of what legal advice i have been able to obtain at this short notice . it is my request to you , mr deputy speaker , to rule that there is a prima facie case that this is a hybrid bill , and i invite you to refer it to a committee of experts that you would appoint to examine that case . i thank the hon . member for giving notice of his point of order . according to erskine may , paragraph 30.57 , “ hybrid bills are public bills which are considered to affect specific private or local interests , in a manner different from the private or local interests of other persons or bodies of the same category , so as to attract the provisions of the standing orders relating to private business … such bills are subject in both houses to certain proceedings additional to the normal stages in the passing of public bills . the speaker has defined a hybrid bill as ‘ a public bill which affects a particular private interest in a manner different from the private interest of other persons or bodies of the same category or class’ … it is not the practice to treat as hybrid , bills dealing with matters of public policy whereby private rights over large areas or of a whole class are affected . ” all bills are scrutinised on publication by the clerk of legislation in the public bill office , in consultation with his opposite number in the house of lords , to see whether they are prima facie hybrid and need to be referred to the examiners . this bill was not referred to the examiners . however , the hon . member has put his view on the record , and if he wishes further clarification , i suggest that he go back to the public bill office to put forward his views one more time . second reading the reasoned amendment in the name of the leader of the opposition has been selected . i beg to move , that the bill be now read a second time . i hope the house will allow me first to pay tribute to lord kerslake , who , as the house will know , died over the weekend after a short illness . bob kerslake was a true public servant , steeped throughout his professional life in local and central government , and wholly dedicated throughout his career to improving the lives of citizens . he began his career with greater london council and went on to run , with distinction , sheffield city council — the fourth largest in england — before making the switch to the corridors of whitehall . he was the first chief executive of the homes and communities agency , the forerunner to homes england , a vital arm of government in making sure that affordable housing is available to all . he was deservedly promoted to become permanent secretary to the department for communities and local government and , later , head of the home civil service , where he served with great distinction and kindness . speaking personally as a minister in the governments where he served , i was deeply grateful to bob for his dedication , his generosity of spirit and his wise advice . after leaving government , bob led the inquiry into the 2017 manchester arena bombing . more recently , he chaired the uk2070 commission on regional inequalities . my colleagues and i greatly valued his work on homelessness with the kerslake commission , and i think we all agree that his energy , knowledge and wisdom will be greatly missed . i know that right hon . and hon . members across the house will wish to join me in sending our deepest condolences to his family in their grief . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] i thank you , mr speaker , and colleagues across the house . the bill does four things : it honours a manifesto promise to which this government recommitted in the last queen ’s speech ; it affirms the important principle that uk foreign policy is a matter for the uk government ; it ensures that local authorities concentrate on serving their residents , not directing resources inefficiently ; and , critically , it provides protection for minority communities , especially the jewish community , against campaigns that harm community cohesion and fuel antisemitism . in our 2019 manifesto , this government committed to “ ban public bodies from imposing their own direct or indirect boycotts , disinvestment or sanctions campaigns against foreign countries . ” the bill does just that — no more and no less . i think it does a fifth thing , which is to introduce a thought crime . were i to be a leader of a local authority opposed to the provisions of this bill , once it became an act , if i continued to say that i disagreed with its provisions and what i might wish to have done with the powers i retained were those provisions not to have been made law , i would be breaking the law . that can not be right in a free society , can it ? it would not be right if the bill restricted local authorities from adopting policies that they considered to be in line with government policy . it is also the case that it would be problematic if we were to restrict freedom of speech in any way , but the bill does not do that . rose — not at this point — i will in a second . it is important to stress what the bill does not do . it does not restrict local authorities adopting policies in line with formal , agreed government sanctions , embargoes and restrictions . it does not impede local authorities considering legitimate commercial factors related to business with a foreign state , and exercising due diligence in the award of contracts . and it does not prevent a local authority from exercising due diligence when considering whether a supplier or investment target might be involved in environmental misconduct , bribery , competition law infringements or labour misconduct , including human trafficking and modern slavery . in no way does the bill circumscribe anyone ’s right to freedom of speech or conscience . what the bill does do is prevent local authorities from singling out individual nations for discriminatory treatment on the basis of an ideological opposition to that nation and its fundamental basis . action is required here because there is an existing , organised and malign campaign that aims to target and delegitimise the world ’s only jewish state . that campaign seeks to persuade public bodies to make commercial decisions solely on the basis of harming that state and its people . i am grateful to my right hon . friend for giving way so soon in this debate . is not the reason every single conservative member stood on a manifesto commitment to bring forward such legislation that we understand that there is something fundamentally illiberal , leftist and with deep , ugly connections to antisemitism at the heart of the boycott , divestment and sanctions movement ? that is what we are trying to tackle today . my right hon . friend is absolutely right . i shall go on to say more about the nature of the bds campaign because we are not talking in the abstract ; we are talking in concrete terms about a campaign that exists , and has been in operation now for nearly 20 years , based on a premise that seeks to delegitimise the state of israel . the campaign also leads directly , as i shall point out , to antisemitic incidents and a loss of community cohesion . i just remind the secretary of state that the bill goes way beyond the activities of the state of israel and will apply potentially to other areas of foreign policy , too . has he considered whether the interaction of clause 1(7 ) and clause 4 will disproportionately interfere with the freedom of expression , and of conscience and belief , of individuals who are making , or have a stake in , the procurement and investment decisions of public bodies ? my view and that of many other lawyers who have looked at the bill is that it will . why has he not produced a human rights memorandum analysing the extent to which the bill interferes with rights under article 10 and article 9 , on freedom of belief , of the european convention on human rights , and article 19 of the international covenant on civil and political rights ? will he do so ? absolutely . nothing in the bill conflicts with any aspect of the echr , not least article 10 . i welcome the fact that my right hon . friend is bringing this legislation to the house today . he rightly mentioned the unsavoury connotations of much of the criticism that the bill is facing , particularly in connection with the bds movement . on that point , could he clarify his thoughts on richard hermer kc , who has provided advice to the shadow front - bench team on this legislation ? mr hermer has previously authored a chapter in a book called “ corporate complicity in israel ’s occupation : evidence from the london session of the russell tribunal on palestine ” , which is edited by some extremely interesting people — i fear that they are interesting in the most negative sense . is this really the calibre of individual who should be advising the official opposition ? my right hon . friend raises an important question because the opposition have tabled a reasoned amendment . i believe they have done so in good faith . as on that point — no . i am merely pointing out what is in the public domain . let us turn to the nature of the bds campaign . will my right hon . friend give way ? not at this point . the bds movement deliberately asks public bodies to treat israel differently from any other nation on the globe . it asks them to treat the middle east ’s only democracy as a pariah state and to end links with those who have a commercial presence there . let me be clear : there are legitimate reasons to criticise the israeli government , to question their policy and , if individuals so wish , to repudiate their leadership , as there are with many other countries . will the right hon . gentleman give way ? no . nothing in the bill prevents or impedes the loudest of criticisms of israel ’s government and leaders , including by elected politicians at all levels of government . will my right hon . friend give way on that point ? no . but the bds movement asks that , alone among nations , israel be treated as illegitimate in itself — will the minister give way on that point ? no . the founder of the bds movement , omar barghouti , has been clear in his opposition to the existence of israel as a jewish state . he has attacked what he calls the “ racist principles of zionism”—that is , the fundamental right of the jewish people to self - determination . the man who founded and is in charge of the bds movement has argued that zionist principles “ maintain israel ’s character as a colonial , ethnocentric , apartheid state . ” on that basis , he opposes any idea of a two - state solution — a secure israel alongside a viable and democratic palestine . instead , the bds movement ’s leader wants a “ one - state solution … where , by definition , jews will be a minority . ” it is entirely open to any individual to agree with that proposition , but it is no part of this government ’s determination or intent to give any heart or succour to a movement that argues that the two - state solution is wrong and that jews should be a minority in one state . can my right hon . friend help us here ? as the effect of israeli policy since 1967 has been to build out of existence the possibility of a two - state solution by settling 700,000 jews who have arrived in the state of israel , with their right to go there under israeli law , it is now no longer possible for there to be a two - state solution , so what is british policy to be ? british policy is , as my hon . friend knows , to promote a two - state solution . i know that he has a long , passionate and committed interest in this subject and i respect the compassion and knowledge that he brings to the debate but , respectfully , i disagree with him . i believe that a two - state solution is the right approach , which the bds movement does not believe . i very much welcome the legislation that the secretary of state is introducing , and we as a party will support it when the time comes tonight . there are many examples in northern ireland of councils having overstepped the mark by boycotting goods from israel and penalising and focusing attention on the small jewish community . local authorities should be working hard to support diversity and good relations , not ridiculing and condemning our small and minority communities . it is clear to me that the point of the legislation is to make sure that that does not happen , so let us make sure that it goes through tonight . i agree , as i do almost always , with every word that the hon . gentleman said . rose — i will take interventions in due course , but i want to make a little progress first . i want to be clear about what the bds movement is and what it does . the bds movement is not , in its origins or operation , a campaign that is designed to change israel ’s government or shift israel ’s policy . it is designed to erase israel ’s identity as a home for the jewish people . again , the founders of the bds campaign have been clear , saying : “ a jewish state in palestine in any shape or form can not but contravene the basic rights of the … palestinian population and … ought to be opposed categorically ” . alongside those who lead the bds movement on the bds national committee sit members of the council of national and islamic forces in palestine , a coalition of hamas , palestinian islamic jihad and the popular front for the liberation of palestine — all militant organisations that are proscribed by this government . will the secretary of state give way ? i will give way in due course , but not at this point . the effects of the campaign are sadly manifold . the bds campaign opposes efforts to bring israelis and palestinians together to broker peace through a two - state solution , opposes cultural exchanges between israelis and palestinians , and fights against co - operation between israeli and palestinian universities . bds has specifically denounced an organisation called onevoice , which is a joint palestinian - israeli youth organisation that campaigns to end the occupation , campaigns against settlements and campaigns for the establishment of a palestinian state . because onevoice does not use the rhetoric of apartheid that bds deploys , and because it does believe that there should be a jewish state , it is denounced by the bds movement . rose — i will make more progress and then give way . where the bds campaign has been adopted and endorsed there have , unfortunately , been real community - cohesion problems . we have seen an increase in antisemitic events following on from the activities of the bds movement , including supermarkets removing kosher products from their shelves following specific protests . the community security trust has recently recorded the highest ever number of antisemitic incidents . in evidence adduced before the supreme court in 2020 , the following point was made . the evidence said that “ although anti - israel and pro - palestinian campaigning in itself is ” , obviously , “ not anti - semitic , there is a pattern of anti - semitic behaviour in connection with campaigns promoting a boycott of israel . for example , protests outside an israeli - owned shop in central manchester in summer 2014 led to some jewish people using the shop being racially abused by protestors , including shoppers ” — i hope the house will forgive me — “ being called ‘ child killer ’ , comments such as ‘ you jews are scum and the whole world hates you ’ , and nazi salutes being made at jewish shoppers using the israeli - owned store . on social media , hashtags such as # bds , # boycottisrael and # freepalestine are regularly used by people posting anti - semitic tweets and comments . ” that is why labour friends of israel has rightly stated : “ bds damages communal relations and fosters antisemitism at home , while doing nothing to further the cause of peace and reconciliation between israelis and palestinians . public bodies should not be singling out the world ’s only jewish state for boycotts . ” luke akehurst , a labour nec member speaking in a personal capacity , has also argued that we should “ welcome the government ’s proposed bill to end the ability of public sector bodies to carry out boycotts and divestment . ” mr akehurst added that he was against bds more widely “ because it deepens the divisions in the middle east conflict rather than encouraging dialogue and coexistence between israelis and palestinians . bds demonises and delegitimises israel ” . i agree with labour friends of israel , i agree with luke akehurst , i agree with the board of deputies , and i agree with the jewish leadership council , all of whom back this bill . i agree with the french and german governments who have taken action against the bds movement , and i agree with all 50 governors of us states — democrat and republican — who have denounced the bds movement . the question for every member of this house is whether they stand with us against antisemitism or not . i thank my right hon . friend for giving way . although i disagree fundamentally with the point that he has just tried to make , my question to him is this : has a single diplomatic post specifically advised that the bill contravenes our un security council requirements and resolutions ? i am sorry , but i missed the point — forgive me . has any diplomatic post specifically advised the government that what is being proposed this evening in the bill contravenes our un security council resolutions ? i know of no such advice . this ill - drafted bill has multiple contradictions , as excellent legal advice has highlighted , and it may actually contravene international law . although the secretary of state may be happy that he will have these additional powers , the bill will no doubt be subject to multiple legal challenges , and therefore a lot of taxpayers ’ money will once again be wasted by the government . does he concede that well beyond bds and the middle east , the bill may hamper the uk ’s ability to protect and preserve human rights across the world ? no , i absolutely do not . the bill enhances the uk government ’s ability to protect human rights across the globe . on the point that the hon . gentleman makes about legal challenge , it is the case that organisations such as the palestine solidarity campaign and others have challenged the government in this area in the past . they may do so again , but i am confident that the bill is legally watertight . on the point — will the secretary of state give way ? no , i am answering the hon . gentleman ’s question first . on the point about the legal advice from mr hermer kc , as i have said , we believe that that legal advice is flawed and it comes from someone who has a clear political record of partiality on this question . i thank the secretary of state for giving way . i hope he will recognise that many of us in this house have stood up to the bds movement . therefore , his rather intemperate suggestion that only if we support this legislation are we against antisemitism does not pass muster . does he recognise that those of us who would like to see local authorities challenged — perhaps through the equality act 2010 — can find troublesome elements in this bill ? it is almost as if his myopia about the bds movement has blinded him to the consequences of this and what it could do . the secretary of state boasted earlier that there were exemptions around labour rights and environmental laws , but is it not ironic that the bill does not include an exemption around genocide ? those of us who have communities that are desperately concerned about the uyghurs , the rohingyas or what happened in sri lanka recognise that this legislation could stop our speaking out for them . will he work with us — those of us who want to tackle antisemitism and to stand up for human rights — and rethink his proposals ? i have a lot of respect for the hon . lady and i acknowledge her work to fight antisemitism and stand against the bds movement — more than acknowledge it , i applaud her for it . i would say three things . first , there is absolutely nothing in the bill that prevents the uk government or other public bodies from taking appropriate action against myanmar , against china over the treatment of the uyghurs or against russia and belarus over their aggression towards ukraine . i have seen no solid legal advice to suggest that is the case at all . secondly , if the hon . lady or anybody else wants to table amendments in committee that can improve the bill , i am completely open to them . i have not yet seen any such amendments , but i know she and others in this house are skilled in drafting legislation , and i look forward to seeing the appropriate amendments . however , as we have seen in the past , attempts to deal with the specific menace that the bds campaign creates through guidance have not been sufficient . primary legislation is required . the shape of that legislation i hope we can decide together across the house . the secretary of state mentioned that it is the uk ’s long - standing policy to support a two - state solution . it is also the uk ’s long - standing policy to differentiate between israel and the occupied territories . the uk endorsed united nations resolution 2334 . why is there no differentiation in the bill between israel and the occupied territories ? does that not increase the risk of antisemitism ? no ; they are separated in the bill . i am afraid the hon . lady is wrong . my right hon . friend is being very generous in listening to the rather strong opinions on the bill , but can i press him again to consider alternative ways to deal with the threat of bds without offering the glass jaw that i see clause 3(7 ) as presenting to parliamentarians , and to work with me and others to find a better way to do this ? i will also say that ad hominem attacks on independent counsel , whoever they are , are not advisable and not wise . i am grateful to my right hon . and learned friend . of course we are completely open to the consideration of any amendments that can give better effect to the shared intentions that we have across the house to deal with this movement . however , israel is there in the bill because of the clear nature and the clear and present activities of the bds campaign . were there to be an alternative , one would have to make sure that it dealt effectively with that area . like my right hon . and learned friend i think my right hon . friend is completely right . local government has a critical role in delivering public services , including support for the most vulnerable in our communities . it is vital that central government support it in that endeavour and that local government should not be diverted from its core purpose by other temptations . the secretary of state said earlier that the bill fulfils a manifesto commitment , but the manifesto commitment was not country - specific ; it was country - agnostic . there was no mention of israel or bds in it . indeed , another manifesto commitment was that we would champion freedom of expression and tolerance . he will recall that a former secretary of state for education wrote to all our universities to ensure that they allowed freedom of expression . how is that compatible with clause 4(1)(b ) , which states that any person who “ would intend to act in such a way ” — of having a boycott on any part of a foreign country — “ were it lawful to do so ” , would be prohibited from doing so and would be penalised by the courts for doing so ? how does that represent championing freedom of expression and tolerance ? i should say to my hon . friend , whose commitment to advancing peace and to freedom of speech i respect , that all the bill seeks to do is to ensure that boycotts and boycotts in name only can not be brought forward . it has absolutely no effect — chilling or otherwise — on the exercise of freedom of speech . i agree with the secretary of state that there is a particular problem to do with israel and bds , but the bill is not country - specific . nor is it specific on whether it applies to investment or disinvestment . of all the bills i have ever read , it is particularly woolly in its drafting . will the secretary of state respond to a few scenarios ? we found out that a number of local authorities in this country are twinned with chinese towns . if they choose to un - twin with those chinese towns , will they fall foul of the bill ? they are investing in twinning offices and travel expenses . if they were instead to set up a twinning agreement with a taiwanese town , for example , or to set up a hong kong freedom centre , would they fall foul of the legislation ? indeed , under clause 1(2 ) , on decisions “ influenced by political or moral disapproval of foreign state conduct ” , would flying a ukrainian flag over a town hall fall foul of the bill as well ? i can not see that any of those actions would fall foul of the legislation in any way . it is clearly the case that , in each of the areas that my hon . friend mentions , particularly with respect to china , the government are taking appropriate action to demonstrate our consistent disapproval of china ’s behaviour , not just in xinjiang but specifically , as he rightly mentions , in hong kong . will my right hon . friend give way on that point ? not at the moment . it is important , following on from the point made by my hon . friend by virtue of my right hon . friend ’s capacious mind , he has had the uk ’s foreign policy delegated to his department as well . he said in answer to the chair of the foreign affairs committee , my hon . friend yes . across government , every minister supports the bill , and quite rightly , because it gives effect to our manifesto commitment and ensures that we live up to the responsibilities that we have to deal with divisive campaigns that operate on the ground in a way that adversely affects minority communities and , most especially , the jewish community . rose — i am coming to the end of my remarks . i recognise that many people have , in good faith , expressed concerns about aspects of the bill , but i point out that the provisions are specifically designed to provide a high bar to ensure that local government acts as it should in accordance with the interest of its citizens , to ensure that uk foreign policy is articulated with one voice , and to ensure in particular that a campaign that those on both front benches are clear has been responsible for the demonisation of the state of israel , for the delegitimsation of its right to exist and for discrimination against jewish people in this country , is , at last , dealt with . for those reasons , i commend the bill to the house . as i said earlier , the amendment in the name of the leader of the opposition has been selected . i call lisa nandy to move that amendment . i beg to move an amendment , to leave out from “ that ” to the end of the question and add : “ this house , while opposing any discrimination or prejudice in the economic activities of public bodies , believing that all such bodies must act without bias or selectivity when making ethical decisions on procurement and investment and recognising the impact selective and biased campaigns have had on the jewish community in particular , declines to give a second reading to the economic activity of public bodies ( overseas matters ) bill , because the bill risks significantly undermining support for groups around the world facing persecution , for example the uyghur , who are currently victims of grave and systemic human rights abuses , is incompatible with international law and the due diligence of public bodies , undermines the uk ’s long - standing cross - party position in respect of the occupied palestinian territories and golan heights by conflating these with the state of israel and running counter to un security council resolutions , singles out the state of israel in effect creating the issue it intends to solve , seeks to enforce its provisions by giving unprecedented powers to the secretary of state beyond those enjoyed by the police and the security services , places unprecedented restrictions on the ability of public bodies , many of them directly elected , to express a view on policy , current , proposed and desired , has potential widespread and negative impacts on local government pension funds , limits freedom of speech and is likely to be subject to repeated and extended legal challenge by reason of its conflict with established legal principles ; and therefore urges the government to bring forward alternative proposals . ” i recognise the secretary of state ’s very touching words on lord kerslake . he was lord kerslake to some , but bob to those of us who have benefited over many years from his ceaseless encouragement and advice . his knowledge of central government and local government was unparalleled . his commitment as a genuine public servant who cared deeply about people will be badly missed . he was taken from us too soon , and i would like to add our voice to the very touching tribute from the secretary of state . it is perhaps in the spirit that bob would have wanted that i approach the bill — on a note of consensus , on something that ought to be a matter of consensus for labour members . i recognise that there are deeply held feelings about these issues , and i want to acknowledge that members in this debate must be heard . i shall , of course , welcome interventions , but i will seek to balance that with the need of members on both sides of the house , whether i disagree with them or not , to make their views known . i want to begin by saying to the secretary of state that we recognise the problem which he says the bill is designed to tackle . it is therefore deeply frustrating that the government have introduced a bill that is needlessly broad , with sweeping , draconian powers and far - reaching effects . instead of members on both sides of the house having the opportunity to come together and welcome long - overdue action , he faces genuine , legitimate , heartfelt opposition from conservative members ; from groups who face persecution , such as the uyghur , who thought that we stood with them ; from human rights groups ; and from local government . i have watched the secretary of state lose government members because of the tone that he has struck in the debate . i hope that as the debate progresses he will listen to some of those concerns . i say to the house that it does not have to be this way . it is not , in our view , wrong for public bodies to take ethical investment and procurement decisions . in fact , there is a long history of councils , universities and others taking a stance in defence of freedom and human rights . in the case of elected councils , their electors often expect them to do just that . there is a difference between legitimate criticism of a foreign state ’s government and what some individuals and organisations have tried to do in recent years , which the secretary of state outlined well . to seek to target israel alone , to hold it to different standards from other countries , to question its right to exist , to equate the actions of the israeli government with jewish people , and in doing so create hate and hostility against jewish people here in the uk is completely wrong . there is at least one example of a publicly funded body that has taken a stance against the state of israel that has effectively cancelled jewish culture here in the uk . we will always stand against that . most public bodies would not dream of behaving like that , but even one incident has unacceptable and far - reaching consequences for the jewish community , increasing hate and hostility at a time when antisemitic attacks have reached a peak , children learn behind gates , and security guards stand outside synagogues . the hon . lady is speaking really well , and she gave a remarkable second reading speech on the holocaust memorial bill . the hon . lady is trying to suggest that examples of bds are few and far between , and that it is a legitimate field of activity for public bodies to comment on foreign policy and express ethical concerns . the trouble is , time and time again , it is about bds and it is about targeting israel . when the welsh government issued a procurement advice note two years ago , they were trying to single out israel yet again , and no labour mp said a thing about it . is that not the problem ? i can assure the right hon . gentleman that i feel strongly that bds offers no meaningful route to peace either for the palestinians or for the israelis . i can assure him that when bds is used as an argument for the total economic , social and cultural isolation of the world ’s only jewish state , not only will i speak out but i have spoken out time and time again . as far as i know , i am the only member in the house — there may be others , and i apologise in advance if i have missed anyone — who has gone directly to take on those who argue for a boycott , divestment and sanctions against the state of israel and for a one - state solution . i have taken on that argument , because i firmly believe that it is wrong and unhelpful . as i have just made clear to the house , this might not be every public body — i do not believe for a moment that it is — but one incident is too many . it has profound effects on the jewish community . that is why so many people in the jewish community have fought long and hard for action to tackle this problem , and it is why we support them . in fact , we were sufficiently concerned about it that earlier this year we tried to amend the procurement bill to ensure that when councils take ethical decisions , they do so in line with an ethical framework and government guidance and apply those decisions across the board , not seeking to single out any one country for differential treatment . we believe that that amendment offered clarity and certainty to our elected officials and councils , and security for the jewish community , and we were disappointed that the government voted it down . however , we continue to believe that there is not — and never should be — disagreement between us on that principle . i also do not believe there is disagreement between us on whether we oppose the policy of boycotts , divestment and sanctions against israel . opposing that policy is a long - standing labour position , and it will not change . as i said to we on the labour benches do not claim that all those who support bds , despite our profound disagreement with them on that issue , are antisemitic . our concern is with those who have tried to whip up hostility towards jewish people under the cover of either bds or the targeting of israel , particularly those who seek the total economic , social and cultural isolation of the world ’s only jewish state . that is what we must deal with , in a way that is enforceable — that has real impact and real teeth — and that tackles the problem it is designed to solve . does my hon . friend agree that we have worked hard to ensure that we are not antisemitic , and that for the minister to display what he has done in the chamber does no good to our democracy ? this is a very badly written bill — it is not a good bill — and the minister ’s suggestion that anyone who votes against it is antisemitic is just a disgrace and something he should withdraw . this is a debate that needs far less heat and far more light , because we are talking about real people — about communities in the uk who are among the most marginalised and discriminated against in our country . i thank the secretary of state for acknowledging in his opening remarks that labour front benchers are acting in good faith in the approach we have taken , but i would echo a note of caution : we should not in any sense suggest that members , of all parties in this house , who have expressed profound reservations about the bill in front of us can be deemed to be antisemitic . they are not . they are participating in democracy and giving voice to real concerns . they are doing what we were sent to this house to do : scrutinise legislation and ensure that it has the intended impact . i encourage members to continue to do so , because a bill that is designed to promote and protect community cohesion can proceed only with the broadest possible consent . i thank the hon . lady for what she has just said , because i also found the secretary of state ’s suggestion that those of us who oppose the bill are condoning antisemitism , or are in fact antisemitic , to be disgraceful . has she , like me , seen a public letter to the secretary of state from a number of british - based jewish academic experts in the fields of jewish studies , the study of antisemitism and israel studies , including my dear friend professor francesca klug obe , visiting professor of human rights at the london school of economics ? they have expressed the view that this legislation is damaging and wrong - headed and should be withdrawn . will the hon . lady confirm that that is a letter from leading british jewish academics ? i am grateful to the hon . and learned lady for raising those concerns . we are keen that all the voices in this debate ought to be heard ; i have heard different views from across the jewish community , but i have to say to her that the overwhelming view i have heard is that there is a desperate need to tackle this very real problem . the strength of feeling in the jewish community that we must legislate to tackle this problem is overwhelming . i do not want for one moment to deny that that is what i have heard in my frequent conversations with the jewish community , but as i will outline , there are serious problems with the bill that need to be addressed . i am grateful for the hon . lady for giving way , and for the tone she has struck . as someone who has a significant proportion of jewish constituents , i speak in defence of them . the bds movement and its increased presence on university campuses has seen the community security trust state that there has been a 22 % increase in campus antisemitism . we are now in a situation where many of my constituents will not go to university because they face such hostility , so the enthusiasm for the bill may not be about its drafting , but about the aims that it seeks to achieve . that is absolutely right . in fact , the union of jewish students , which has expressed real concerns about the bill — the very students who have often been the targets of the appalling abuse and attacks that the hon . gentleman has outlined — is clear that it wants to see this problem tackled . i hope that is a basis on which we can proceed across the house in a debate that , as i have said , needs far more light and far less heat . i remain confident that , with good faith and good will on everyone ’s part , we can find a way to tackle what is a very real problem for the jewish community in this country . i will take a moment to explain why the bill does not do what the government intend it to do . clause 1 attempts to ban public bodies from taking decisions influenced by “ political or moral disapproval of foreign state conduct . ” we have commissioned legal advice that suggests there are two readings of the clause . i would just say to some conservative members that a king ’s counsel — a distinguished king ’s counsel who happens to disagree about the legal impact of this legislation — deserves a hearing and deserves respect . if in a democracy those who disagree with us are accused of acting dishonestly or in bad faith , we are in a very dark place indeed . that legal advice suggests that on first reading the clause applies only when it relates to specific territories . that would create the absurd situation where public bodies could refuse goods from china because of general disregard for human rights , but could not refuse cotton goods from xinjiang because of concerns about genocide against the uyghur population . the second reading of the clause , which i imagine is what the government intend , is that public bodies are banned from having any regard at all to human rights violations of foreign governments unless they are expressly permitted by this government . there are a few exceptions in the schedule referred to in clause 3 — labour rights , bribery and the environment — but not genocide , as my hon . friend my hon . friend is making a powerful speech . does she share my concerns that the bill will weaken our voice on the international stage in tackling human rights abuses ? it will enable many regimes with appalling human rights records , or companies that have track records of labour law violations or environmental recklessness , to continue without consequence , including where those abuses are incompatible with international law . i thank my hon . friend for raising that concern , which has also been raised with me . i defer to the chair of the foreign affairs committee , what is not clear to me and other labour members is why the government have sought to draw this bill ’s powers so broadly . it is not just breathtaking in its reach ; it is deeply contradictory , because the bill itself accepts that there will be times when public bodies will take a view about the conduct of foreign governments on specific grounds , such as modern slavery . in fact , the secretary of state wrote to councils last year urging them to do so in the case of russia , and has since signalled his intent to add russia and belarus to the list of exceptions allowed by clause 3 . only two years ago in this house , i sat on these benches as we proudly and rightly passed the magnitsky regulations , which recognised the power of economic sanctions to direct state conduct and raise global standards . however , the secretary of state is now proposing a bill that will prevent — for example — the department for business and trade from taking human rights violations into account when deciding whether to grant export credit guarantees . surely he can see the problem . the cameron government became a signatory to the un guiding principles on business and human rights a decade ago . the government ’s own action plan makes it clear that businesses have a corporate responsibility to uphold human rights and to monitor those they deal with commercially . after years of promising to hand over powers and spending decisions to mayors , combined authorities and councils , is the secretary of state seriously saying that they are not capable of exercising the same duty ? there are other areas of deep confusion in this bill that we believe will open up the prospect of ongoing legal challenge , and i know that has been raised by conservative members . clause 1 bans action that a reasonable observer would conclude is motivated by moral or political disapproval of a foreign government , but on these deeply contested notions what constitutes a “ reasonable observer ” ? clause 4 is even more problematic . it prohibits public bodies from expressing a view not just about how they intend to act , but how they would have done so had the law not been in force . it is difficult to know how public bodies , particularly those that are elected , should respond to this . in recent years , many councils have , for example , been asked by their own residents not to use chinese companies with links to xinjiang . my own council is one of them . under this bill , faced with thousands of people signing a public petition , a council would not even be able to give any indication of whether or not it agreed with its own residents . our legal advice suggests that this extraordinary situation is likely to be incompatible with article 10 of the european convention on human rights . clause 3(7 ) creates even more confusion . it singles out israel , the occupied palestinian territories and the golan heights as places for which no exemption can ever be made . the long - standing position of the uk government is to support a two - state solution along pre-1967 lines that protects and respects the security and right to self - determination of the israeli and palestinian peoples . this clause drives a coach and horses through that , according the occupied territories the same protected status as israel and in effect conflating the two . it contradicts established government policy , and i find it hard to believe that the foreign , commonwealth and development office has agreed to this . i note the questions from two conservative members , and i am deeply concerned that it appears that the government and the secretary of state have not even asked that question . it appears that conservative members have seen a circular from foreign office officials raising objections to this bill , yet the secretary of state has not . i urge him to look closely at that matter before the bill proceeds . the hon . lady talks about when she has visited israel or palestine , as i have done regularly with the breast cancer projects i am involved with in gaza and the west bank . the thing is that the settlements are illegal under international law , and they have been condemned by the government in the past . obviously , companies , pension funds , councils and devolved governments who try to act ethically and do not wish to purchase settlement goods , which are illegal , would be floored by that clause . how does that match with current uk policy ? i hope , as the debate goes on , that there may be an answer to this , but i have to confess that so far i am at a loss as to what it might be . where does this leave our commitment to international law , given that it cuts across un resolutions , as conservative members have highlighted , and weakens britain ’s stated support for a two - state solution , as the hon . member has said ? the legal advice we have received strongly suggests that this is likely to be in breach of our international law obligations . furthermore , it will force the uk courts , which have traditionally been reluctant to adjudicate on issues relating to the occupied palestinian territories , to take a view . all of these confusing and contradictory measures raise the very real prospect of protracted legal challenge . one of the conservative members recently called this woolly . surely the secretary of state can see that protracted legal challenge over the occupied palestinian territories and the practice of boycott , divestment and sanctions would not be in the interests of community cohesion , which is the very thing this bill is designed to protect . will my hon . friend give way ? i will not give way , if my hon . friend will forgive me . a lot of people are wishing to speak , and given that she has made one intervention , i will make a bit of progress . as if that were not bad enough , it seems that nobody in government has thought of the consequences for local government pension funds , which is arguably the one area where councils have to have a global outlook . let me give the secretary of state a practical example . in recent months , as he will know , three israeli companies have moved their money outside israel due to concerns about the financial risks created by the contentious reforms to the judiciary . if a local government pension fund were to do the same , this bill would open it up to legal challenge , forcing it to prove to a reasonable observer , whatever that is , that its decision was on financial , not moral grounds . writing in the local government chronicle , the director of pensions at westminster council asks what happens “ where an analyst has anticipated that a company ’s value will decrease because of esg decisions it has made … if that strategy falls within the new law ’s definition of not being in line with uk foreign defence policy , and the law therefore states that the fund must remain invested , and the fund therefore loses value , who will pay for that ? ... the government ’s current message is that ‘ this is not designed to get in the way of esg factors , excepting the very narrow area of uk foreign or defence policy ’ . but this is absolutely not a very narrow area . ” he adds : “ we could end up in a scenario with never ending arguments involving esg factors versus foreign and defence policy . ” surely that can not be the intention of this government . i think i agree with everything my hon . friend has said this afternoon . she will remember , as i do , how many of us on the opposition benches , and indeed in all of the house , spent years of our lives campaigning against the apartheid regime . that was a very strong policy within local authorities and it had real impact at the time , so much so that when nelson mandela came to this country to thank people , he included them in those thanks . does she believe that , had this legislation been enacted at the time , it would have prevented those authorities from taking the action they did to oppose apartheid ? south africa is obviously a different case , but the point my hon . friend makes remains and is well founded , because this bill concentrates the decision making and judgment of hundreds of public bodies in the hands of just one person . the hon . lady talked about pensions , and there is an additional point . whatever people may think of bds or of an investment strategy that is ethical or otherwise , the money that sits in the local government pension scheme — and i am a member of the local government pension scheme — is the members ’ money , my money . it is not the government ’s money to direct in one way or another ; it belongs to the pension holders , and it is surely for them and those to whom they delegate its management to decide how it should be deployed . as she rightly says , if the government are getting into the business of managing my pension money and i lose money because of decisions made by the government , presumably i should be compensated . this is precisely the question that the government have yet to answer , but we hope that will be forthcoming during this debate . i would add to what the right hon . gentleman said that the local government pension service is already under a fiduciary duty to take prudent investment decisions based on an assessment of the financial consequence of a number of matters , including environmental and social governance , and when it divests on the basis of non - financial factors , it should follow the law commission direction that any financial impact should not be significant and that the decision would likely be supported by scheme members . i am not sure what happens when a local government pension fund is taking decisions that would not be supported by scheme members . we are talking about the pensions of 6 million people in this country , and i think these are important questions that the government must answer . i want to turn to one of our chief concerns about this bill , which is the concentration of the decision making and judgment of hundreds of public bodies in the hands of just one person and the implications of that for some of the most persecuted people in the world . there will be significant effects on the uyghur in xinjiang , who are suffering such serious crimes against humanity that the biden administration have recognised it as genocide . the secretary of state will have read the impassioned letter from those groups in the times about the effects of this bill . surely we can not abandon them to their fate . for the rohingya in myanmar , for the tamils in sri lanka and for countless others , the concern is that this bad law prevents not just economic action to uphold human rights everywhere , but solidarity with some of the most persecuted people in the world . as was said earlier , the bill goes further and clause 7 grants to the secretary of state or other relevant body the power to issue notices requiring all information to be handed over , if they suspect that a prohibited statement expressing a moral or political view about foreign conduct is in the process of or about to be made , including information in subsection ( 8) that would normally be protected by legal privilege . let me clear about the effect of that : this hands over to the office for students , the secretary of state , and the treasury , greater powers than those available to the security services . i know there are members on both sides of the house who are deeply troubled by that , and those who are not should consider for a moment how they might feel about this bill if their party was not in power . we should not be here . we have long fought for legislation to tackle what is a real problem , and we are determined to give the government the opportunity to do the right thing . that is why today we are proposing an alternative that allows the government and this house to keep our promise to tackle a long - standing issue of deep concern to the jewish community , but avoids tearing up our commitment to human rights , local democracy and free speech , in a bill that does not even appear to tackle the very problem it seeks to solve . the hon . lady has made a number of powerful points . she will have heard me question the secretary of state about the fact that the bill is not country agnostic ; it is directed primarily at one country and one issue , which is bds . the question for her is , in a way , the opposite of that , which is that this problem has come to be because of decisions made by leicester city council and lancaster city council , which are labour - run councils acting arguably in cahoots with bds . what does she think the labour party can do to take away the perceived requirement to have a bill that seems , at the moment , largely to argue against bds ’s actions against israel ? i listened carefully to what the hon . gentleman had to say and i support it , but he should please not try to tarnish labour members with a record on antisemitism . there are those of us who stood up not just to those who are supposed to be our opponents , but to those who are supposed to be our friends as well . and we will always do that . i give my word , and i give our word on behalf of the labour party . as i am about to outline , we have provided the government with an alternative . earlier this year we sought to amend the procurement bill to ensure that no single country , especially in the cases that we have been describing and the world ’s only jewish state , can be singled out for different standards from others , and in doing so whip up hate and hostility against the jewish community . it is a real problem . we provided the government with a solution . they refused it , but we remain convinced that co - operation and consensus is the right approach to tackle what we accept is a very real problem . today , the secretary of state will hear this refrain again and again from members on his own back benches , and across the house : two important principles — the need to tackle racism and antisemitism , which are a scourge on our society , and the need to stand up for human rights , freedom of expression , democracy and our long - standing position on israel and palestine , and act in accordance with international law — and those things should never be seen as mutually exclusive or allowed to be pitted against one another . we have a number of serious suggestions about the way that this problem can be tackled . we have outlined an alternative approach . we have provided the secretary of state with a solution , and we urge him to take it . otherwise , he should know that labour members will be compelled to vote against the bill on third reading , as i suspect will significant numbers of his own colleagues . it is an outcome we should all strive to avoid . if a pledge to tackle division , around which there is broad consensus , was derailed by a combative approach and a government who refuse to listen to the wide range of voices that have expressed their concerns , that would be a crying shame . with good will and good faith on the part of the government , we can proceed together . we have proposed how . the ball is now in the court of the right hon . gentleman . this evening ’s debate should focus on the specifics of the bill in front of us . the right of israel to exist and defend itself is not up for debate . the right of palestine to exist and defend itself is also not up for debate . the uk supports a two - state solution , and i believe that everyone in the chamber would also be of that mind . i wish to draw the attention of hon . members to the implications of the current drafting of the bill . it has implications on our historic commitments and responsibilities and ability to play the role of honest arbiter within the region , and risks undermining our commitments as a united nations security council member . my concerns about the bill fall within four areas : first , foreign policy implications ; secondly , exceptionalism in legislation ; thirdly , protection of freedom of speech ; and finally , the legality of what we are being asked to support . let me begin with the implications of the bill on foreign policy and international obligations . my first concern , as was raised in earlier interventions , is the conflation of israel and the occupied palestinian territories . conflating east jerusalem , the west bank and the golan heights breaks with our position , because the uk recognises the golan heights as annexed and the west bank and east jerusalem as occupied palestinian territories . that is a departure from our foreign policy . not only does the bill break with our foreign policy , but clause 3(7 ) puts the uk in breach of our commitments under un security council resolution 2334 ( 2016 ) . that is not just an international commitment ; it is one that we drafted back in 2016 . it states that in their “ relevant dealings ” , states must distinguish “ between the territory of the state of israel and the territories occupied since 1967 . ” the bill does not distinguish between our treatment of israel and the opts . why does breaching unscr 2334 matter ? because we rely on the rules based system to protect ourselves and to protect our allies . how many of us have talked about the rule of law in this chamber , when it comes to ukraine and russia , serbia , the balkans , and so many other parts of this world ? the impact of the bill would be significant . it will undermine our position as a respectable and reliable multilateral partner , committed to upholding un security council resolutions as we should as a permanent member . it risks our losing the support of arab states on shared issues , and their vote at the un . we all know that western states are spending a significant amount of time trying to shore up the support of so - called non - aligned countries . i have spent most of the last few days on the phone to arab ambassadors — the same arab ambassadors who recognise israel and want to normalise relations with israel . finally , we risk giving china , iran , russia , serbia and others an easy propaganda win , because they will use this against us when we talk about the annexation of territories around the world . i am concerned that the un special coordinator would have no choice but to explicitly name the uk in their next report on how member states are adhering to compliance with unscr 2334 . i also worry that it sends the wrong message about the achievement of sovereignty through violence . it means that if israel breaches international law in the occupied territories , public bodies can not express their ethical objection to those crimes . i worry that the bill will leave the international community questioning whether israeli settlements in the opts and the golan heights are still regarded as illegal by the uk government . the hon . lady has given a very good list of people that the bill could undermine . does she also recognise that it undermines many people in israel who oppose the occupation in the occupied territories , and it would make their life harder when making the case in israel in a democratic sense ? i have received significant representations from human rights organisations within israel , and also from within our jewish communities in the uk , who feel that this is not only the worst possible timing for the bill , but that they themselves do not support it . if we are now to have questioned our position on the opts legally , how is the bill compatible with that , and with the fact that the conservative government recognise that settlements built on occupied palestinian land since 1967 are illegal ? we must ensure that all legislation makes a clear distinction between israel where we support no boycott , and the illegal settlements on occupied land where a boycott would be consistent with our position on unscr 2334 . why are we undermining our international position by breaching our position on a two - state solution , and changing the uk ’s recognition of certain territories as occupied , when the bill can achieve the same end simply by removing clause 3(7 ) ? the house will hear that point reiterated throughout the evening by many of my colleagues . i was also concerned that the secretary of state appeared not to be aware of the concerns emanating from the foreign office and from diplomatic posts . i ask him to clarify that when winding up this evening . i think the wording was that “ no such advice had been received ” . has the foreign office truly not given any advice that it had concerns that the bill breached our un security council resolutions ? does the uk presently have any policies against goods coming in from the settlements ? i am not aware whether we do , but that would be legitimate within the current un security council restrictions so i would not necessarily oppose it . what i am saying is that we would not necessarily support israel being boycotted , but we would support a boycott of products from the occupied territories , because we consider them to be illegal or annexed . is it not an issue to use the term “ boycotting ” with regard to the settlements ? they are illegal under international law , so no public body should be investing in , or making profit from , them . inherently , the hon . lady makes a valid point , although it is potentially a different discussion . there is a fundamental question around whether we should be boycotting or bringing in goods . as the house knows , i have been vocal in ensuring that goods coming from genocide are not imported from across china . we must have a standard response across all countries . to sum up , my concern is that legislation by the department for levelling up , housing and communities must not depart from our foreign policy , let alone undermine it or leave us ostracised internationally . my second concern is the legislative implications from the exceptionalism proposed in the bill . since my election , the government have been at great pains to make the point to me that all legislation should be agnostic . i must admit that i railed against that when first elected , and the house may have seen me table amendments with the words “ china ” and “ xinjiang ” on repeat — ad nauseam , some might say . however , the government are correct , and i have come to appreciate and recognise that position . to demonstrate that point , let me draw on the procurement bill , which this bill interacts with on exceptions , pension schemes and the uk security services . all the amendments that i tabled to the procurement bill — i am grateful to the government for having accepted them — were country - agnostic , because the government made the point that that is how we legislate , except for such things as trade bills . we should be agnostic in all we do , but worse than being non - agnostic , the bill gives exceptional impunity to israel . we should not give that to any country , and i would be standing here making the same request were any country named . to act in this way now sends a clear message to all members of parliament : “ from now on , it is game on . if you want to put china , xinjiang or any other country into primary legislation , crack on . ” the chief whip will not be able to tell members they can not do it anymore , and government ministers will not be able to argue against it any more , because we have done it and broken that practice in this bill . the government will regret making this precedent . the reality is that we can achieve the same outcome without putting geographic references into primary legislation . on the implications for freedom of speech — i thank my right hon . friend the hon . lady is making a wonderful speech and i agree with everything she has said . on that last point , does she agree that the bill is likely to disproportionately interfere with freedom of expression and the conscience of individuals , in such a way that does not sit with our obligations under articles 9 and 10 of the echr ? i entirely agree with the hon . and learned lady , because this legislation does breach article 10 rights to freedom of speech , as it fails to distinguish between a person and an authority , so individuals risk being liable . if the legislation made clear that it is about public authorities , we would not have those concerns , but the lack of that clarity makes individuals liable to being fined , and therefore it breaches article 10 of the echr . given that the government have just rightly passed the higher education ( freedom of speech ) act 2023 , which i fundamentally and entirely support , to now stop elected individuals from expressing moral disapproval or even to consider or vocalise ethical investment decisions is wrong . my final concern is the legality of what we are being asked to support . i question whether this bill will be legally sound once tested , and i have every reason to think it will not be , because it has previously failed in the high court . when the measure fails again in the high court , we will then see a judgment on the uk ’s treatment of the occupied palestinian territories , which i fear i would not be proud to stand behind . similar legislation has failed , and legal concerns rest around , for example , the terms “ political or moral disapproval ” , which are not defined in the bill and breach our commitment to making human rights fundamental in our decision making . our obligations under the un guiding principles on business and human rights essentially mean that this legislation would see the private sector having greater adherence to our human rights than the public sector . i encourage the secretary of state to consider potential conflict between the uk government and the un stating that settlements are illegal while then penalising local councils in the uk for taking ethical procurement decisions to address that illegality . there is significant unhappiness among colleagues in the house and in our party . to enable my right hon . friend the secretary of state to still deliver on our manifesto commitment , i urge him to please remove clause 3(7 ) , which is unnecessary to delivering on our commitment . we can still do this , with just a small compromise from those on the front bench . the government can still introduce israel ’s exception through secondary legislation , which would mean that we would treat israel as equal to every other state . it would prevent us from breaching our un security council resolutions and from being dragged through the courts . it would maintain our country - agnostic legislative approach , and it would prevent us from undermining our standing internationally . while we are on the subject , i have never felt that we are so close to conflict , particularly following this morning ’s news . there is the chance that we might be seeing a third intifada and the gaza crisis of 2023 , and we need to demonstrate meaningful resolve from king charles street in ending the conflict and de - escalating . i therefore urge the prime minister to appoint a middle east peace envoy , because we do not have any envoy for the middle east , let alone one focused exclusively on the middle east peace process . we should be worried , because what happens in palestine and israel impacts around the world . i stress that this low - commitment ask would allow us to live up to our responsibilities and demonstrate meaningful resolve . with that , i join with other respected friends of israel in urging the government to think again . it is a pleasure to follow the excellent speech of in scotland , we have a proud history of promoting social justice , human rights and respect for international law on the world stage . as “ while we were physically denied our freedom in the country of our birth , a city , 6,000 miles away , and as renowned as glasgow , refused to accept the legitimacy of the apartheid system , and declared us to be free . ” had this proposed legislation been in place during the 1980s , glasgow would have likely been legally debarred from taking the actions that it did , or even from suggesting that it might take those actions , because the then conservative government did not support sanctions for south africa . i remember as a young lad seeing country after country boycotting the commonwealth games in edinburgh in 1986 as a result of the then uk government ’s actions . snp members will be supporting labour ’s reasoned amendment . however , it is missing one key part : the attacks on the devolved administrations . perversely , the democratically elected parliament and government of scotland will be required under the bill to give legislative assent to its enactment . we will be asked to provide the gag that silences our freedom of expression and that of the people we represent . as a good global citizen , scotland is committed to the highest ethical and moral standards in human rights , climate justice , workers ’ rights and economic development . the scottish government will always fulfil their obligations under international law and agreements . the people of scotland rightly expect that actions in scotland should be taken with full consideration of moral and ethical duties to communities around the world , and we will not idly watch that good work being constrained . i entirely agree with my hon . friend ’s points . the welsh labour government have policies on such matters as modern slavery and human rights . public sector investment and procurement are devolved , yet the bill ’s impact assessment does not consider any specific welch approaches . does he agree that the government should do that before taking any further steps ? indeed . there was probably no discussion with the devolved administrations on the bill and the impact that it will have on the devolved institutions , so i agree with my hon . friend . the uk government claim that the scottish government pursue actions that undermine uk foreign policy , but that is simply not the case — it is not true . for many years , the scottish government have conducted international engagement which benefits the people of scotland and aligns with present constitutional arrangements . scottish government ministers are simply embodying the values - based principles of the scottish electorate , as the welsh would do with the welsh electorate . i listened to the secretary of state arguing for the bill , which gave an impression of what the death rattle of a dying government sounds like . the bill represents a desperate attempt by the uk government to salvage something from the wreckage they have created across the fields of international trade , diplomatic relations and human rights . let us look at those fields in turn . does not the gagging clause in the bill , which will stifle debate and discussion about policy , fit with what we have seen in the last year or so with the public order act 2023 : the seizing by the executive of almost every power to hold the government to account , whether from the judiciary , voters , protesters or even mps , through post - brexit legislation ? let me add trade unions and workers who decide to take strike action . yes , we know who the government ’s enemies are because they have been legislating against them in the last year since they crashed the economy . in nottingham , we have significant numbers of people , including hongkongers and those from other parts of the world , who have fled from many countries perpetrating human rights abuses . they rightly do not want their councils or universities to be complicit in human rights abuses that their family and friends continue to experience . does the hon . member agree that public bodies must have the right to take a principled stance against , for example , the persecution of the people of hong kong , the uyghurs in xinjiang or political dissidents across china ? i do agree . i am going to quote an exchange between the hon . lady and a minister later in my remarks , so she may want to intervene again . i have uyghur muslims as constituents . i know how serious the issues are . i have kurdish constituents who are very concerned about the oppression of kurdish people in turkey and syria , for example . i will always stand beside those people , but the bill will prevent public bodies and institutions from taking such steps . that is a real concern . the government are leaving themselves open to a new slogan : never mind the probity , feel the width . their ability to grow trade is now severely constrained , so they seem to be selling off their own principles to the highest bidder . previous attempts to work with others in making the world a decent place are now to be put aside . rogue nations are to be tolerated for the sake of business and their transgressions ignored . the bill — the dog ’s breakfast that it is — leaves them open to that charge . amnesty international uk is right to say that the bill will “ make it almost impossible for public bodies to use their procurement and investment policies to incentivise ethical business conduct that is human rights compliant . ” however , perhaps the objective is not surprising . from the uk being an original drafter of the european convention on human rights , i note that some on the government benches now wish the uk to leave that . we would have hoped that the conservative government might have learned from their disastrous policy of giving succour to the apartheid regime in south africa . when the world railed against that regime , the then conservative government turned a blind eye , even though we already knew the consequences of appeasement from earlier experiences . we have learned in the last century what happens when governments do not have a conscience and turn a blind eye to wrongdoing . we have learned that responsibility lies not just at a national level but at a local level — and , yes , even at the level of the individual . now we are informed that giving expression to that conscience locally will be penalised under the law . it would appear that the only good conscience is a tory conscience as expressed by a government minister at westminster . i ask myself : why are the government pursuing this policy ? does every government member want to stifle local democracy ? every society has its share of people who are mainly self - interested , with little concern for those outside their own circle . it would be good to think that that proportion of society has shrunk as we have become more aware of world affairs . but it still seems to be far too substantial , suggesting to niche voters that principles are costly to us and we can not now afford them . that is a dangerous game . it is much easier to break down society than to build it up ; to make people isolationist rather than internationalist . patching that fragmented society together again would be a monumental task . but there is good news : there are some parts of the united kingdom where that dystopian dream is not being pursued — quite the opposite , in fact . we have had helpful support in our position regarding israel , for example . on thursday , at that very dispatch box , the international trade minister told the house that the uk has a clear position on israeli settlements in the occupied palestinian territories : “ they are illegal under international law , present an obstacle to peace and … a two - state solution . ”—[official report , as set out in foreign , commonwealth and development office guidance on overseas business risks , there are clear risks to uk businesses related to economic and financial activities in the settlements and we do not encourage or offer support to such activity . so the government ’s position seems to be , “ do n’t do it . we do n’t support it , but we ’re not going to allow people to boycott it . ” that is a very confusing position for the government to find themselves in . the secretary of state suggested that the bill does not stop boycotts of occupied territories , but actually we need just to read the bill to see that that is exactly what it proposes . will the hon . member give way ? i will in a second . i want to make it clear that the scottish government and the snp unequivocally condemn and distance themselves from members or affiliates in the bds movement who advocate a complete boycott of israel and israeli people and who suggest that the state of israel does not even have the right to exist . the scottish government are also committed to tackling all incidents of hate crime , working in partnership with a range of organisations , including police scotland . it would be a cruel distraction for the government to equate sympathy and support for oppressed people with antisemitism . the bill leads to the accusation that the government think there are good and bad occupations . as others have said , when i have uyghur muslim constituents with children in camps , i can not support and vote for a bill that would stop organisations from campaigning against or boycotting chinese goods on the basis of the treatment of uyghur muslims . with kurdish constituents , i can not support a bill that would stop me , or organisations or public bodies , from boycotting goods from turkey or syria on the basis of the oppression of kurdish people . i can not support a bill that ignores environmental concerns . friends of the earth said that the bill will “ prevent public bodies from divesting from fossil fuel , as well as diverting their money away from inadvertently funding human rights abuses abroad ” . that is what the bill does . it will make it illegal for public bodies and local authorities to divest from or boycott fossil fuel companies and those with poor track records on protecting environmental standards . the scottish national party — and i believe , the scottish people — will not participate in this diminution of freedom of speech and disregard for the wellbeing of our friends throughout the world . earlier , i referred to the bill as the death rattle of a dying government . ministers really should withdraw the bill ; it is a complete and utter dog ’s breakfast . if they do not , i support the opposition ’s reasoned amendment and the bill does not deserve to pass second reading . rose — a large number of right hon . and hon . are trying to catch my eye . if we are to get everyone in , my guidance is that speeches should be limited to about six minutes . i agree with much of the sentiment of the shadow secretary of state , i would respond to some of the things that the hon . lady said on two fronts . first , it is okay for people to make reference to the political views and other writings of a kc who is advising her and her right hon . and hon . friends . that is a perfectly legitimate thing to bring to the house ’s attention . king ’s counsels are not gods and they are not beyond any criticism . secondly , she made the point , in many ways , for why we require the bill — specifically , clause 3(7 ) . she highlighted her own work — for which i applaud her — during a very difficult time in her party ’s history . she stood up and received all sorts of appalling abuse because of the position she was prepared to take on what was going on in her party . i am grateful for and impressed by her bravery in doing that . it was an incredible thing for opposition members to do at that time . precisely because we ended up in the position we did , where people with sympathies for the bds campaign came very close to power in this country , we require clause 3(7 ) and the specification of israel . bds is an antisemitic , racist campaign — there is no doubt about that . it singles out the state of israel for special treatment . there is something peculiarly sinister about those who obsess about israel while being blind to the behaviour of despots and dictators across the world . i hope that is not the case for most members in the house , but it is for some who oppose this view . that is not my view , but that of the german parliament , the bundestag , which passed a motion a few years ago that stated that the actions of the bds were reminiscent of the terrifying nazi campaign against jewish people under adolf hitler . it went on to say : “ the ‘ do n’t buy ’ stickers of the bds movement on israeli products ” could be associated with “ the nazi call ‘ do n’t buy from jews ’ and other corresponding graffiti … on shop windows ” . i would hope that none in the chamber would support those sorts of actions or behaviours . it is a little off subject , but today we learned that the last french d - day fighter of nazism léon gautier has passed away . it would be nice for us to remember his name today . sadly , that behaviour rooted in the nazi period has not passed . we have seen so many examples of it , as members have reminded us this afternoon . i thank my hon . friend the bds campaign has consequences . it is no wonder a jewish driver was attacked in golders green outside kosher kingdom for daring to have an israeli flag on his vehicle . it is no wonder we end up with the appalling antisemitic incidents and attacks on british campuses . british jews become the targets and victims of the campaign — none of us should forget that . we can not divorce bds from its impacts on the jewish citizens of our country . we have seen record numbers of antisemitic incidents in recent years — it is important to remind the house of those . last year , 1,652 antisemitic incidents were recorded by the community security trust . worryingly , the proportion of victims who were minors has increased . perhaps even worse , the proportion of minors perpetrating those attacks has also increased ; in 2022 , 20 % were recorded as minors — a number that has doubled in recent years . we must do everything we can to abate the trend among younger people , some of which is motivated by the bds campaign . every time there is a flare - up in the middle east conflict , british jews are on the receiving end . the current issues , which the chair of the select committee , my hon . friend any rise in tensions in the middle east will result in an uptick in bds activities . i was interested in what the scottish national party spokesman , many people with issues about the bill have legitimate concerns — there is no doubt about that . the secretary of state said at the dispatch box that he was prepared to work in committee to see how we can improve the bill if required . that was a sensible thing to say . however , i am afraid that for some who oppose the bill , it is always about israel . their beef is always the state of israel . i have heard some bizarre arguments against the bill , one of which is that it will increase antisemitism . that is a strange argument , to put it mildly . just because some people do not like the legislation , saying that it might result in an increase in antisemitism and “ oh , in which case , let ’s not bother with it ” rather proves the point of the bill . rose — i will give way , because i like my hon . friend . it is not really about liking each other , important though that is . it is about what the jewish chronicle itself has said : “ boycotting israel is wrong but this anti bds bill is not the answer … this is a bad bill … and bad especially for british jews ” . is my hon . friend aware of that , and does he realise that many jews are not in favour of this way of trying to protect themselves from antisemitism ? the editor - at - large of the jewish chronicle , in an excellent piece today , wrote : “ there is no room for shades of grey here . you either think it ’s fine to boycott jews — in which case you will oppose the bill — or you do n’t , in which case you will support it . ” i thank my hon . friend for his intervention , which rather helpfully takes me on to my point about the view of the jewish community : the board of deputies of british jews and the jewish leadership council are united in believing that the bill is invaluable in the battle against antisemitism . i was responding to some of the opposition to the bill . one issue is that of settlements . the bill will have no impact on the uk ’s policy on settlements , which is that they are illegal under international law . that does not change with the bill . the country does not , at the moment , have a boycott policy against settlement products or products coming from the occupied palestinian territories , precisely because it is so complex in terms of who actually works there and who is damaged economically . the bill makes no difference to that and neither does it prevent any criticism of israel . that can continue and we have heard that today . i end where i started : this legislation is necessary to deal with a pernicious and peculiarly sinister antisemitic campaign group . rose — order . i remind colleagues that i said six minutes , as opposed to 10 . if colleagues could stick to that , that would be helpful . i am afraid i completely disagree with the government have put forward legislation that is flawed , poorly drafted , and will have damaging consequences both here and abroad . they have not done it to support israel , to demonstrate solidarity with the jewish community , or to show they really care about undermining the bds movement . they simply want to set a political trap for labour . by putting their crude party political interests above the public interest , they confirm what voters think about us : that politicians waste time on childish political games rather than trying to make the world a better place . it is that behaviour that leads to a loss of trust . the bill is not a considered attempt to bring about peace , provide better security for israel or respond to the threats posed by bds . it is about using jews as a pawn in the government ’s political game . to debate the bill on the day that violence has flared up again in the west bank is a solemn reminder of why this really matters . i say to the government : our voters have had enough of that sort of politics , and so have i. like many who oppose this legislation , i am a proud zionist . i oppose the divisive and at times antisemitic bds campaigns . i will always fight antisemitism , whenever and wherever it rears its ugly head . action is needed , but the bill will do more harm than good . so what is wrong with it ? first , it singles out israel . many supporters of israel rightly feel that hostile campaigners single out the israeli - palestinian conflict and that the same level of attack is not meted out to myanmar , for example , or to china for its treatment of the uyghurs . the bill plays into the hands of antisemites by doing the one thing we should never , ever do : single out israel as the one place that can never be boycotted . no other country is named . if the bill is passed , i fear — and know from my own post box — that it will have the unintended consequence of increasing anti - jew hatred in britain . we have seen the letter to the prime minister from uyghur exiles opposing the bill , because it will affect them and make it impossible to boycott goods from china . what thought have the government given to ethical concerns that public bodies may have about , for instance , the ugandan government and their treatment of the lgbt community ? by singling out israel , the bill pits the mainstream jewish community against every other valiant human rights campaign , and does so in a way and at a time that will make peace in the region more difficult . i returned recently from israel , where i saw the chaos being wrought by the extreme actions of the present government . from undermining democracy with attacks on judicial independence to the untrammelled expansion of settlements in the occupied territories , israel has never been more divided and israeli politics has never felt more broken . the best thing britain can do is to put diplomatic pressure on the israeli government to abandon the judicial reforms and de - escalate the violence . the bill will deliver the complete opposite . it will be heralded by the netanyahu government as a ringing endorsement of their actions . it will send the wrong message at the wrong time . like others , i reject the approach of bds to israel . its actions encourage hatred between communities and too often its supporters are antisemitic in what they say . wrongdoing is never defeated by stifling free speech and open debate , and that is what the bill does . it prohibits elected public officers from even making statements suggesting that they support boycotts in any state . clause 4 is a gagging clause , and arguments are never won by suppressing democratic debate . i learnt that fighting the british national party in the 2010 general election . i did not beat nick griffin by refusing to engage with him . it was by engaging publicly , by his appearance on “ question time ” , and by allowing him free speech that we exposed what a vile , divisive , racist party he led . unmasking him through debate helped us to smash him at the ballot box . the government have just legislated to enshrine free speech in our universities , but are now cancelling the freedom of elected officials in this grubby little bill . were they really committed to tackling the bds problem , they would support our reasoned amendment which would ensure that decisions public authorities took on procurement and investment would be consistently applied to all countries . israel would not be singled out . i spent years as a councillor . the idea that local politicians should not express views on either national or international issues is deeply arrogant . we stand for public office because of our political principles , and that is true whether one is a back - bench councillor or a cabinet minister . the idea that the two elected positions differ in their democratic status is plain wrong . it is a typical , hugely centralising move by the government that puts yet another nail in the coffin of devolution . on those grounds alone , the bill should be opposed . i was in local government when anti - apartheid was a strong movement . our council joined many others to boycott south africa . margaret thatcher opposed those boycotts in the name of economic liberalism and introduced legislation in 1988 similar to that proposed today . as we now know , that legislation proved ineffective , but the government seem incapable of learning the lessons of history . i urge members to support the amendment moved by my hon . friend i thank the government for bringing forward this important bill . in my former role as chief secretary to the treasury , i took the public service pensions and judicial offices act 2022 through the house , and that marked the first legislative step against bds . it was a landmark moment , legally enforcing the principle that bds has no place in the investment decisions of local authorities . i strongly welcome our fulfilling our manifesto commitment to extend that principle . put simply , local authorities have no business running a foreign policy parallel to that of his majesty ’s government . that remit is absolutely within our gift , not theirs . their role is to deliver local services for the communities they represent , to innovate and to deliver best value . i say that as someone who is a convinced believer in devolution . i believe that we should empower mayors to lead areas of the country in a way that will unlock their economic potential , but i do not want them opining on the rights and wrongs of the behaviour of different countries . it is emphatically unhelpful for local authorities to hinder our country ’s export trade , damage our foreign relations and act in a way that is to the detriment of our international or economic security . much of the specific concern in this debate is about israel , and that is because it is always about israel . this is the point that we can not elide and that sits at the heart of the reason why israel needs to be mentioned on the face of the bill . there are members arguing against israel being named specifically in this bill for whom i have great respect and whom i count as personal friends . but we can not be oblivious to why israel needs this protection . the overwhelming focus of the bds movement is , of course , on this one small state . the bds movement is not arguing against the horrors perpetrated in russia , china , iran or any number of other countries — we could list for hours those countries that perpetrate grotesque wrongs against their people — and i do not see local authorities acting against those countries , either . i see them acting consistently against our ally israel . there can be no doubt , as my hon . friend i come to this debate without any significant minority community in my constituency . i simply see a wrong that we should right , an offence that we should not give , and money , energy and time that our local authorities should be spending to better effect on their significant responsibilities . foreign affairs should be left to this place , not to town halls . it is an honour to rise to oppose this bill in the strongest possible terms . i was very disappointed in how the bill was presented by the secretary of state , who left his place without even listening to other front - bench speeches . i was incredibly encouraged , however , by the chair of the foreign affairs committee , i want to cover three main areas : the unprecedented powers that the bill gives the secretary of state and , by implication , the removal of balanced decision making from those in local government who have been elected to serve their local communities ; the incompatibility of the bill with international law and the conflation of the uk ’s long - standing cross - party position in respect of the occupied palestinian territories and the golan heights with the state of israel ; and the exposure of the uk government to extended and repeated legal challenge , which would take away money that , as let me go through those three points . the government have often stated their commitment to devolution , and they have delivered it in many areas , allowing as much decision making as possible to take place near the people whom politicians are elected to serve . this bill flies in the face of that claim . it will act as a gagging order on local authorities in a way that no other piece of legislation does . many in local government have raised huge concerns about the impact of the bill , including the local government chronicle , the local government association and the tuc . particular concerns have been raised about the bill ’s impact on the 6 million local government pensioners . is that really the government ’s intention ? the bill will ban public bodies — mainly local authorities but also universities and others — from working within current procurement rules and making their own decisions appropriate to their own areas . if we look to history to inform the future , we will see that the most effective example in my lifetime was the successful campaign against the apartheid regime in south africa . that undoubtedly helped bring down that regime and led to democracy in south africa , which is something that the international community and the uk should be proud of . are we really suggesting that we should not be allowed to take such a position again ? i turn to the bill ’s incompatibility with international law and the uk ’s long - standing cross - party position in respect of the occupied palestinian territories and the golan heights , which are being conflated with the state of israel . why does the bill highlight those three areas ? on the face of it , it looks as though the secretary of state wishes to penalise councils that have acted not against the state of israel but against illegal settlements built on the occupied palestinian territories , in flagrant defiance of successive un security council resolutions , which the uk helped draft and voted in favour of . it seems to me that the uk government are throwing all sense to the wind . we all wish to see this part of the world living in peace . the violence that has erupted today is an example of how crucial it is to bring peace to this area . the failure to distinguish between the sovereign territory of israel and the territories occupied in 1967 , as outlined in un security council resolution 2334 , is an alarming deviation from the long - standing uk policy . i ask the secretary of state to look again and remove the most contentions parts of the bill . those who push this bill make a very dangerous conflation between legitimate criticism of illegal israeli actions and the horror of antisemitism , which we all abhor . finally , and briefly — i am going to stick to the time limit — this bill , if it goes through in its current state , will result in an appalling waste of money . it will undoubtedly lead to not one , not two but numerous legal challenges , with each costing the government , and therefore the british taxpayer , an enormous amount of money . in the current economic climate , throwing things to the wind and rushing headlong into such a bill , which does not solve the problem that it sets out to solve , is absolutely irresponsible in the first degree . i ask the government to either look again and remove the contentious clauses , or start again and bring to the house a bill that actually does what it sets out to do and that sorts out the problem and does not cause utter chaos in this area of policy making . i rise with a heavy heart to agree with many comments from across the house on the nature of this defective bill . i agree with richard hermer kc , who in a very compelling interview published in today ’s jewish news talks about the problems that this bill presents not just for the uk as a whole but for british jewry in general . taking things in order , my primary concern is the safety of that community . as somebody who has worked very closely with the jewish community , particularly in the capital over the years , and who has a strong affection for the haredi community in north london , whom i know well both in policing and crime terms and having dealt with their housing issues as housing minister , i am afraid that i agree with “ what is the favourite refrain of the antisemites ? that israel is the one country you ’re not ‘ allowed ’ to criticise . this bill takes a canard and , in the case of boycotts , turns it into the law of the land . ” the inclusions of clause 3(7 ) and , indeed , parts of clause 4 send a chill through that sense of debate , and will feed some of the disgusting conspiracy theories about the status of israel and the influence that that country has around the globe . i have to say that i fear for the safety of the jewish community should the measures be passed in that form . there are those who would do its members harm — we all know that in this house , and i have seen it for myself — and we can not give them succour by falling into that trap . my second concern is the practical impact of the bill on many organisations across the country . as we heard from thirdly , two key fundamental issues that are intrinsic to the way we live in the united kingdom are challenged by the bill . the first is , obviously , the free - speech challenge to which a number of members have already referred , and which is represented in clause 4(2 ) . it appears that i can not even criticise this law , whether i am a council leader , a university vice - chancellor , or the chief executive of a company that is performing public services . i have never before seen legislation that outlaws disagreement with the law , and i think that breaching that right to free speech is a very problematic step . the second of these issues was mentioned by the fourth area that concerns me relates to our tradition of pluralism in this country . there is no doubt that the bill will send a chill through debate about a series of conflicts across the world . whether we are talking about the uyghur muslims in china , the fate of hong kong chinese or , indeed , those in israel and palestine , the fact is that everyone who is engaged in democracy , locally or on a devolved - nation basis , will have to be extremely careful about what they say . they will have to think twice and three times before they discuss these issues , lest that should prejudice , or be seen to prejudice , an investment or other decision that they may make in the future . this is especially problematic in the context of academic freedom . as we heard from the chair of the select committee , my hon . friend finally , i want to raise the issue of timing . the right hon . member for barking said that this was the worst bill at the worst time ; i think that it is a defective bill at a dreadful time . given what is unfolding in israel and palestine today , given the toll of deaths that we have seen so far this year on all sides and given the international concern about the escalating violence in that part of the world , the introduction of this bill at a time when many countries in that region are extremely concerned about what is going on will be seen by arab countries in particular — although members may not feel this themselves — as being partial , and as privileging one country over the others . i think that that will be detrimental not just to our interests in the united kingdom , which are a primary concern . but to the interests of israel , palestine and the wider region . it is a pleasure to follow another excellent speech dissecting what is wrong with this very faulty bill . what a contrast it was with the secretary of state ’s opening speech , which was effectively a display of polemical and performative rhetoric , containing assertions that the bill itself contradicts — and i think that was a shame . we have benefited from some extremely good analysis , although i have not been able to read all the briefings on the bill that we have received , not just from eminent kcs — it was , again , a shame to witness one of them being speared by the secretary of state — but from some leading expert organisations in the field : from the council for arab - british understanding , from our former colleague richard burden , from the balfour project , from many jewish organisations including yachad and the union of jewish students , from many trade unions , and from environmental groups who believe they will be caught up in this as well . i do not think that is what the secretary of state intended ; i think he intended the bill to appeal to a populist narrative ; but i do not think that has happened . perhaps it is the revenge of the experts whom he trashed so publicly years ago . while it is good that the bill is not being given a platform and is not acting in the way in which the government would like it to act — the way in which all the other legislation they are introducing seems to act at the moment — that does not mean that it is not a dangerous bill . it does not mean that there is no harm in its provisions : harm to civil society , the rule of law and freedom of speech , principles that the secretary of state would doubtless say that he wishes to uphold . i am pleased to say that the nature and number of the risks in the bill have been helpfully set out by the shadow secretary of state , my hon . friend in the very limited time available to me , i want to headline my concerns . the first question i want to ask is this : will the bill help or hinder groups that are under threat around the world , such as the uyghurs , the rohingya , minorities in countries , or people in occupied territories — in western sahara , northern cyprus , crimea , or the palestinian territories ? will it help them in any way ? the answer is , i think , a clear no . the bill will run contrary to international law , it will run contrary to united nations security council resolutions , particularly resolution 2334 , and it will run contrary to the due diligence and fiduciary duties of local authorities and other public bodies and to legal principles . the fcdo guidance has already been quoted , and we have heard what ministers have said as recently as last week in making distinctions between our policy towards israel and our policy towards the occupied palestinian territories . this point has been made a number of times already . by treating israel exceptionally , the bill does it no favours . by treating the occupied palestinian territories alongside israel , in a way that i have not seen before and that runs contrary to government policy over many years under different governments , the bill makes a significant break and gives comfort to those who wish to see the palestinian territories under permanent occupation , including many within the extremist government in israel . whatever the secretary of state says , the bill is a clear attack on free speech , and it is quite kafkaesque in how it denies people the ability to speak out against what is happening . by inflicting not only strong powers of search and seizure but unlimited fines and penalties on those who speak out , this really is appalling legislation . the bill will have a chilling effect . we do not need to analyse the exact effect on every procurement and investment decision to see that pension funds are conservative bodies that will take decisions in ways that do not lay them open to this very woolly legislation . the consequence is that they will make bad decisions that go much further than the secretary of state says he wishes to take the bill . finally , i speak up , as many members do , for the palestinian people . how does this bill benefit them ? what effect will it have ? on a day in which battlefield weapons are being used against civilian areas of the west bank for the first time in decades , we are talking about this scurrilous and performative bill . the occupied territories have been occupied since 1967 . who will champion , as i wish this government and this country would , their right to self - determination and their right to have their country recognised as a sovereign state , as we absolutely respect for the people of israel ? this bill only hampers ambitions along those lines . for those reasons , i ask members on both sides of the house to vote for the reasoned amendment and not to allow the bill to pass from this house in its current form . i also have grave reservations about this bill . i want to be clear that it is not exclusively about israel and palestine ; it is about the mandate and responsibility of elected figures in the uk . it is also about contradictions in policy . on the one hand , we have legislated to protect freedom of speech in universities , but this bill will prevent universities from discussing the impact of foreign governments ’ behaviour on their activities . the bill is wide in scope but confused in its relationship to the government ’s aims as a whole . for instance , clause 1 is worded so that territories recognised as illegally occupied by international law are still within scope , wherever in the world they are . it seeks to prevent public bodies , such as local councils , from “ being influenced by political or moral disapproval of foreign states when taking certain economic decisions ” . in fact , those public bodies may well simply be having regard to international law or the previously expressed opinions of his majesty ’s government . clause 4 addresses how a person intends to act . this means that elected officials with serious responsibilities can not even have a public discussion about how they ae affected by the behaviour of overseas states . a prohibition on publishing means it is impossible to have a discussion at a hustings , in the media or in response to questions about human rights . as we have heard , the bill is likely to end up in court , either in the way that prigozhin tried to muzzle journalists in the uk or , conversely , by someone asserting that their article 10 rights under the echr have been breached . the bill curbs free speech and the free exercise of responsibility for elected bodies whose mandate we should respect . the bill ’s wording implies that , among office holders , only ministers can express an opinion on the countries that should be exempted under clause 3 . this means that people in other tiers of government with responsibilities within the scope of clause 2 can not . no matter how bad a country ’s human rights record or respect for international law , discussion or action will be prevented . that brings me on to israel , the occupied palestinian territories and the occupied golan heights . why have they been singled out in clause 3(7 ) ? like my right hon . friend jonathan freedland wrote in the jewish chronicle of his concern that the bill will make antisemitism worse , because banning the consideration of the economic consequences of things that are happening in the occupied territories , and issuing financial penalties where consideration is given , will just cause resentment . as he says , the best way to bring about change is to engage and debate . i disagree with some bds advocates , such as the palestine solidarity campaign . israel has every right to exist , and its people have a right to live in peace . however , where israel breaches international law , others must be permitted to point this out and hold it to account . this bill would prevent that . the bill mentions the opts and the golan heights . does this mean that boycotting the settlements will be against the law ? these settlements are illegal under international law , and the uk government ’s own website states that there are “ clear risks related to economic … activities in the settlements , and we do not encourage or offer support to such activity … uk citizens and businesses should be aware of the potential reputational implications of getting involved in economic and financial activities in settlements , as well as possible abuses of the rights of individuals . those contemplating any economic or financial involvement in settlements should seek appropriate legal advice . ” israel benefits economically from its illegal occupation , and we should be permitted to comment and consider it in our policies . the foreign secretary ’s joint statement with australia and canada on disagreeing with the policies of the israeli government has nothing to do with antisemitism . after all , many israelis disagree with their own government . this bill will not promote community cohesion but do the opposite , opening more divisions . like others , i fear it may be detrimental to the british jewish community . i hope this bill will be substantially changed in committee and beyond , because i do not understand why we need it . this poorly drafted bill will have far - reaching consequences for the uk ’s protection and promotion of human rights overseas . i extend my thanks to the coalition of 70 civil society and justice organisations that have expressed strong concerns about this bill and how it will outlaw a powerful tactic of dissent and freedom of expression that has been used throughout history to achieve social change . i rise to oppose this bill and to support our reasoned amendment that would decline to give it a second reading . what is at stake today should deeply concern every member of this house . the bill risks significantly undermining support for groups around the world that are facing persecution and international human rights violations . labour steadfastly supports a negotiated diplomatic settlement to the israeli - palestinian conflict , based on two states , and opposes the expansion of illegal settlements , settler violence , evictions and demolitions . but how realistic is that when an israeli national security minister has pledged to “ crush ” palestinians “ one by one ” ? let us not forget that boycott campaigns have existed right across the political spectrum and have long been used as peaceful and principled tools to fight oppression and injustice . they are a form of protest that should be protected in a democratic society . last year , the secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities asked councils to divest from russia following the illegal invasion of ukraine , and he clearly recognised councils ’ economic importance and that moral considerations should inform what they do , so why can they not be trusted to make their own choices now ? this bill is so broad and destructive that it will completely prevent public bodies from taking responsible and ethical decisions in relation to human rights abuses in their investment and procurement decisions . although the secretary of state argues that there are safeguards in the bill , he knows they will do nothing to limit the damage this bill will cause . i am proud to represent the city of liverpool , a city that has never faltered in its solidarity with international liberation struggles . in the 1980s , when the african national congress and south african trade unions were fighting apartheid , as a city we mobilised across the board to support their struggle . trade unionists organised in ford factories to smuggle anc literature in the boots of cars , and seafarers dropped parcels at south african ports . the boycott movement played a significant role in successfully turning the tide on the apartheid government , at a time when many powerful international governments , including our own thatcher - led government , supported the regime . the importance of international solidarity when waging a struggle such as that against apartheid can not be underestimated and this rings as true today as it has throughout history . in the words of nelson mandela : “ our freedom is incomplete without the freedom of the palestinians ” . his words resonate today , with injustices and violations of international humanitarian law across the globe still demanding accountability . now , as then , international pressure will be key to achieving peace and justice . let us be clear : the aim of the bill is to limit our ability to take action to protest , and the chilling effect that will be created is immeasurable . perhaps the most chilling aspect of the bill is the so - called “ gagging clause ” , whereby not only will public officials be prevented from raising the issue of human rights abuses in financial decision making , but it will be illegal for them to refer to the bill as the reason preventing them from making a financial decision influenced by human rights abuses . for a government who claim to champion freedom of speech , this is the depths of hypocrisy . it should make members in all parts of this house seriously consider the impact of their vote today . today ’s vote is historic and it is up to us to decide which side of history we are on : are we a nation that champions freedom of expression and conscience , one that encourages acts of solidarity with the oppressed , or are we a nation that curbs even the basic right to speak out about violations and abuses of human rights ? vote for the reasoned amendment . decline to give this bill a second reading . i strongly support this legislation , and i want to thank all constituents who have been in touch with me to tell me their views on it . it is my honour and privilege to represent a constituency that is home to a substantial jewish community . as we have heard this evening , the bds movement is deeply divisive . the founder of the group and many of its leadership figures do not recognise the right of israel to exist . they have no commitment to a negotiated settlement and want to drive the two sides apart , not bring them together . as has been pointed out , these local boycotts split communities here in britain . many jewish people feel a deep sense of connection to israel , so they could feel intimidated and victimised if their local council were to pursue a boycott . the spillover of anti - israel to anti - jewish attitudes and discrimination is illustrated by the supermarket that , in 2014 , took kosher foods off the shelf after protesters gathered outside in support of a boycott of israel . moreover , the bds movement often seeks to justify its campaign using the allegation that israel can be equated with apartheid south africa . that is a pernicious slur . in falsely accusing israel of racism , it singles out the world ’s only distinctively jewish state for unjustified and disproportionate attack . that falls squarely within the international holocaust remembrance alliance definition of antisemitism and we should always reject it . i am gravely concerned that bds activity has sometimes legitimised and driven antisemitism , and i note that the communities secretary has stated that bds has led to “ appalling antisemitic rhetoric and abuse ” . there is no justification for a boycott or sanctions against israel . cutting economic ties with israel will do nothing to further the peace process , or to get negotiations restarted . israel is our ally . it is the only real democracy in the middle east ; the only country in the middle east where equality for women is fully protected ; the only one where the rights of the lgbt community are respected ; and the only one with a genuinely free press and a fiercely independent judiciary . we should be strengthening economic , cultural and academic links with israel , not severing them . deeper engagement with israel means that we as a country can play a stronger role in supporting peace and reconciliation between israel and the palestinians . it also brings advantages for jobs and economic growth here in the uk . i welcome the 2030 road map for bilateral relations between our two countries , which was signed in march and will boost tech , trade and security ties . the phenomenal energy of israel ’s digital economy and its cutting - edge pharmaceutical sector are just two reasons why trade with israel is an important source of prosperity for us in britain . in 2017 , the health minister lord o’shaughnessy estimated that every year some 100 million nhs prescription items in england are made by companies in israel . if we listened to the bds movement and adopted its approach , we would see major disruption of nhs procurement of the medication that so many of us need and , inevitably , that would lead to rising costs . i join my right hon . friend in welcoming today ’s legislation . bds activists who bully councils into adopting these measures are also bullying the uk ’s advertising industry . for example , stop funding hate and ethical consumer are pro - bds groups that tell their supporters to follow the bds national committee , a group with links to hamas and other designated terrorist groups . does she agree that today we can , certainly as a first step , set an example in tackling bds within public bodies ? indeed . today is our opportunity to take a stand against bds and i encourage as many hon . members as possible to do that . as part of the largest ever deal between an israeli and a uk company , rolls - royce is delivering engines for el al dreamliner aircraft , supporting many highly skilled jobs in britain . that type of massive commercial opportunity would be a thing of the past if we let these bds boycotts take hold and spread . in conclusion , this is a timely bill that i hope the house will back . i am deeply disappointed that labour has said that it is voting against it today . the question is : do you support boycotts against israel or do n’t you ? i am strongly opposed to boycotts of israel , which is why i am voting for the bill this evening . i am proud that it is a conservative government who have listened to the jewish community on this vital issue and brought forward the bill it asked for to ban council boycotts . israel is our friend and ally and we should be trying to increase trade with israel , not trying to ban it . there is no justification for local councils adopting their own international trade policy . these are rightly matters for our democratically elected government in westminster . i urge hon . and right hon . members to support the bill in the division lobby this evening . i had been looking forward to this legislation . as the chair of labour friends of israel , i am against efforts to destabilise , delegitimise and destroy israel , the world ’s only jewish state . the purpose of the bds movement , with its talk of apartheid , genocide and ghettos , is to demonise and , ultimately , destroy israel . i had hoped we might see a simple bill designed to restrain the ambitions of bds , with its single target , the state of israel . boycotts are not new for jews . on the effect of bds is felt not only in israel . a 2019 ministry of strategic affairs and public diplomacy report concluded that the victims of bds include jews in the diaspora . let us think what it means to be jewish in britain today . there is an understandable affinity between israel and jews in this country , but every day jewish students confront obsessive campaigns for an academic boycott of israeli universities . bds seeks to prevent israeli artists , actors and musicians from performing in britain . it wants libraries to remove israeli authors and to “ no - platform ” israeli speakers . supporters of bds often seek to draw a comparison with south africa . the measures taken at that time were designed to end apartheid and bring about the democratic state that we see today . but — here i agree with the secretary of state — bds does not support a two - state solution , advocate peace negotiations or seek to bring communities together . to be fair to its leader , omar barghouti , he is clear that he opposes a jewish state in any part of what he calls palestine . we all know what the chant “ from the river to the sea ” actually means . bds is a policy designed to end israel ’s existence . the movement opposes the idea of normalisation ; in fact , normalisation has become a pejorative term in relation to israel and palestine thanks to the efforts of such movements . of course , bds is not without success : a vociferous campaign against sodastream led to the closure of a plant in the west bank and the loss of 600 palestinian jobs . bds puts at risk the 10,000 uk businesses that have import - export arrangements . the uk is israel ’s second largest trading partner , with a relationship worth about £ 7 billion . israeli companies provide one in seven nhs drugs , estimated to save us around £ 3 billion per year . as we have heard , we are negotiating a new free trade arrangement , which will vastly improve benefits for both countries . our security arrangements help to save thousands of lives and regularly help to foil terrorist attacks in the uk , yet bds wants to end military co - operation . it is against that background that i had hoped to welcome this legislation ; instead , we get a dog ’s dinner — a bill that in its present form can serve only to guarantee conflict between the government , local authorities and other public bodies , and will inevitably result in endless legal challenges . it seeks to limit the freedom for councils and other public bodies to speak out in the face of obvious injustice . far from not singling out israel — a key demand of many jewish and anti - bds groups — specific attention is drawn to israel in the bill . this is a bill that has lost focus . its scattergun approach and willingness to confuse legitimate political protest with what should be simple powers to restrict the demands associated with the bds movement will provide endless publicity opportunities for israel ’s enemies . it is unworkable in its current form . if there is to be any hope of the bill becoming a reasonable , practical measure , it requires substantial improvement . i hope that the secretary of state will not play party or petty politics but seek to build consensus with people across the house who are willing to work together on measures designed to rid us of the malign influence of the bds movement . at the same time , i say to my hon . friend i welcome many of the remarks made by the point of the bill was to fulfil a conservative party manifesto commitment , so let me explain why i am unhappy with it . first , as it stands , the bill fulfils something different from our manifesto commitment ; secondly , it seriously undermines our commitment to freedom and tolerance ; thirdly , it gives a special and exclusive right not just to israel but to parts of israel that are either annexed or illegally occupied ; fourthly , it effectively outlaws even the express thought of disagreeing with the bill , should it be passed ; and lastly , it could backfire — and it is elements of the jewish communities who say that , not me . let me bring the detail alive . our manifesto did not mention israel or the bds ; it focused on preventing “ public bodies from imposing their own direct or indirect … sanctions … against foreign countries . ” that commitment was , absolutely rightly , country - agnostic , yet clause 3(7 ) specifically protects not just israel but the golan heights and the occupied palestinian territories , which are of course not countries . the provisions exempt israel alone from any change in government policy — for example , the sanctions on russia — and that could be changed only by primary legislation . our manifesto also rightly committed to championing free speech and tolerance . as i mentioned earlier , as have others , the secretary of state for education legislated only recently specifically to enforce that commitment on our universities ; now , however , as a university vice - chancellor put it to me , the secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities has told him that he can not even say , were it allowed , that he would prefer his university not to purchase anything manufactured on illegal settlements in the occupied territories . is that really what is intended ? this bill , as presented on second reading , appears to be a pro - israel and anti - bds bill much more than the country - agnostic anti - boycott bill promised in our manifesto . in turn , that has caused — there was no point in some members denying this earlier — some jewish commentators in jewish media , jewish student unions and jewish civic society groups to express real concern that the bill risks backfiring . as the jewish chronicle said , it would be “ bitterly ironic if this … bill ” to tackle the “ anti - israel bds , ends up hurting those who so many … have sought to help ” . the union of jewish students went further and said that the bill may “ pit jews against other minorities ” . so what to do ? the labour party solution is to rip the bill up and start again in unspecified ways . our solution should be different . we should fulfil our manifesto commitment to legislate against public - body sanctions in a country - agnostic way , but we do not need a special rule for israel , let alone for annexed or occupied areas that the united kingdom does not recognise as a legitimate part of israel . i very much hope that on third reading the government will reconsider clause 4(1)(b ) , which as it stands is antidemocratic , and drop clause 3(7 ) , which is neither necessary nor appropriate . i will therefore abstain in the vote on second reading . i very much hope that the commitment of my right hon . friend the secretary of state to consider drafting amendments will be strongly realised on third reading . i remind members that i am a vice - president of the local government association . first , i want to be very clear that the liberal democrats condemn antisemitism . anti - jewish hatred has absolutely no place in our society , and we must all do more — as individuals , as political parties and as a parliament — to tackle antisemitism in all its forms . nor do we support the bds movement or any other singling out of israel driven by anti - jewish hatred . however , we do not believe that this piece of legislation is going to help to tackle antisemitism . in fact , as many members throughout the house , including liberal democrats are also deeply concerned by a series of the provisions in the bill . first , it will greatly restrict the ability of public bodies to take action against human rights abuses . many public bodies as well as civil society organisations are alarmed by the persecution of the uyghurs in xinjiang , which has led to the detention of more than a million people by the chinese state . regrettably , the government have failed to recognise the genocide that is taking place in xinjiang , even though parliament has called on them to do so . it is appalling that a local council will be prevented from calling what is taking place in xinjiang what it is — a genocide — simply because the government continue to take a cowardly approach . it seems extraordinary that a local council or museum would risk a significant fine by deciding that they did not want to buy products coming from xinjiang . many of us in this place will remember the popular boycotts of south african goods in the 1980s , which were an effective way of demonstrating opposition to apartheid and which added to the international political pressure to end the regime . in this country , it was local councils that led the way then — and thank goodness they did — but under these new provisions , such action would be illegal . secondly , this piece of legislation represents an unjustified restriction on the power of local communities to take decisions for themselves . as a liberal democrat , i believe in liberalism , federalism and localism . we believe that it is up to local authorities and public bodies to be able to decide for themselves what they do . if local councillors are elected on a manifesto that includes a commitment to a boycott on ethical or environmental grounds , we believe that those councillors should be held to account by their local electorate , not banned by a distant central government . thirdly , we are hugely concerned by the restriction on the freedom of speech on public bodies and elected representatives in clause 4 — the gagging clause . the bill does not just restrict a public body from engaging in boycott and divestment ; it restricts it from saying that it would support such a boycott if it were legal . that represents a significant overreach , which will erode a fundamental democratic right — that of free speech . fourthly , i echo the concerns raised by other members that the provisions in clause 3 represent an attempt by the government to change their position on the status of the occupied territories . the uk government have always made a distinction between the occupied territories and israel , in line with international law . that is clear in everything from our trading arrangements to the advice given to businesses looking to operate in the occupied territories . however , the bill conflates the two by listing the occupied territories as exempt from the bill alongside israel . the bill goes against not just the widespread consensus held on both sides of the house and by our allies , but international law . what an irony it is that , at the heart of a bill designed to restrict local councils from speaking out about international issues , we find the secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities trying to conduct his own foreign policy . it is almost as if he has forgotten the purported purpose of his own legislation . on today of all days , when we have awoken yet again to more violence in the region , it is incredibly depressing that the government are choosing not to stand up for international law , at a time when there is such hopelessness around the conflict . in conclusion , i firmly agree that we need to do more on the pressing need to tackle antisemitism . i agree that the bds movement targeting israel will not help to achieve peace between israel and palestine . if there is a need to beef - up legislation on hate crime or prejudice against protected characteristics , such as race and religion , liberal democrats would wholeheartedly support such a move . local councils should not be singling out one country and holding it to a higher standard than others because of their own prejudice , but closing down debate on international human rights issues will not achieve the stated aim of stamping out antisemitism . the resolution to the problem is not to clamp down on debate on international human rights issues . the liberal democrats will oppose the bill for that reason , and will be voting in favour of the reasoned amendment tabled by those on the opposition front bench . i urge the secretary of state to rethink this legislation and work across party lines to resolve issues of prejudice and discrimination by more practical and fair means . i rise to speak in support of the legislation this evening . i welcome the fact that we are following through on a manifesto commitment to bring forward legislation in this difficult , sensitive and complicated area . i very much agree with the remarks made by my hon . friend we have had a number of speeches striking slightly different tones . there was a very good speech from to those members who argue that the problem with this legislation is that it will attract legal challenge , i say that every single time we have tried to do something about the bds movement it gets a legal challenge . we know that the bds movement will try to fight this in the court . that is not a surprise , but that should not be a reason for us to resile from our commitment to do something about the matter . there will be members in the house today who believe that the bds movement , leaving aside its ugly antisemitic characteristics , is a legitimate way of trying to challenge the state of israel . we heard that in some of the speeches . the trouble with the bds movement , as we know , is that time and again it singles out the state of israel in a way that it does not do with other countries . as for the labour party trying to maintain a reasonableness about its position , i say look at what it does when it is in government . when the welsh labour government tried to introduce a new national procurement note in 2020 , what did they do ? surprise , surprise , they singled out one state for potential sanctions — the state of israel . i am talking about labour ministers of the crown today serving in the welsh government in cardiff , so members will forgive me if i do not have total confidence in the reasonableness of the labour position that it is trying to put forward . the bds is a palestinian - led movement . who else is it supposed to protest against ? i realise that it has a global application , but it is a palestinian - led movement about palestine . my hon . friend is right : it is a palestinian - led movement . when we consider the individuals and organisations — palestinian and otherwise — at the root of it , we can see that the movement is deeply problematic . i do not believe that any conservative should be identifying and aligning themselves with any aspect of the bds movement . i welcome the legislation . i welcome , too , the fact that the secretary of state has made a very strong commitment to working with others and seeing whether improvements can be made to the bill . he has shown a genuine openness in that regard . none the less , improving the bill can not mean watering it down to make it ineffective , which we know the opponents of the bill — the bds movement outside this place — want us to do . i hope that the government will remain robust and clear - sighted on this , but i also hope that we can work pragmatically and get good legislation on the statute book . i am pleased to contribute to what has been a generally thoughtful debate , from the moment that the shadow secretary of state rose to speak . i am sorry that the secretary of state left so soon after his own rather provocative contribution , because he would have benefited from hearing many of the speeches . this is an ill - judged and unnecessary attack on local democracy — unnecessary not least because of the provisions of the local government act 1988 , which , alongside the notorious clause 28 prohibiting local authorities from “ promotion of homosexuality ” , also banned non - commercial consideration on contracts on the basis of “ the country or territory of origin . ” that remains in place , so the secretary of state has law to refer to , without needing to bring forward this bill , if there are the problems he describes . that legislation was a response by the thatcher government to a campaign co - ordinated by sheffield city council . we were the first council in 1981 , under the leadership of david blunkett , to pledge to end all links with apartheid . many others followed , and in 1983 we set up local authorities against apartheid , developing a network of around 120 councils taking action — action that was subsequently praised by nelson mandela after his release for its contribution to ending apartheid . as someone who was in the leadership of the anti - apartheid movement for 20 years , i do not accept the application of the term apartheid to israel , although i have to say that , if the policy trajectory of the current israeli government continues in the way it has , that comparison will be increasingly difficult to resist . my point about the action that we organised is that it demonstrates the long history of local authority action over human rights , which is something we should be proud of , and of local politicians responding to local concerns , whether about south africa 40 years ago or about china today . clause 3 will enable action to be taken where dispensation is given — by the whim of the secretary of state , not even by parliament . however , that highlights the exception provided in clause 3(7 ) in relation to israel , the occupied palestinian territories and the golan heights . i want to be clear that i do not support the bds campaign against israel . i do think that we should long ago have taken action on economic engagement with the illegal settlements , to match our words with positive measures , and it is extraordinary that this bill prevents public bodies from implementing the government ’s own advice to business not to trade with the illegal settlements . however , for those of us who do not support bds , that does not mean we should support banning it , and much of israeli society would agree . i am grateful to yachad , which many colleagues will know is a significant voice within the mainstream british jewish community , campaigning for a political resolution in which israel thrives alongside a viable and independent palestinian state . in its briefing on this bill , it drew parallels with the debate in israel on its own anti - boycott law in 2011 , in which tzipi livni , then leader of the opposition in the knesset and previously foreign secretary , said : “ i disagree with those that demand boycotts , but i will fight for their right to express their views . ” dan meridor of likud , then deputy prime minister , said : “ i oppose boycotts , but they should not be illegal . ” ruvi rivlin , then leader of the knesset and subsequently president of israel , slammed the law for “ turning freedom of speech into a civil injustice . ” the government argue that this bill is necessary in opposing antisemitism , but , as others have said , there are important voices within the jewish community who disagree . as chair of the all - party parliamentary group for students , i have worked closely with the leadership of the national union of students in challenging antisemitism within its own organisation , and on every step of that journey i have liaised with the union of jewish students . nobody will question the ujs ’s credentials as a robust opponent of antisemitism . at its annual conference recently , ujs unanimously passed a resolution reaffirming its opposition to bds , but rejecting any attempt to outlaw it . one of those involved in that motion wrote recently in the times : “ using legislation to outlaw bds will do nothing in the fight against antisemitism … we may disagree with the bds movement — we may even think that there are some people who support the bds movement who are motivated by antisemitism — but the tactics of boycott , divestment , and sanctions are non - violent and legitimate . ” the secretary of state has argued that it is his responsibility to bring forward this legislation in the context of the government ’s manifesto commitment . i am conscious of the fact that the government have fairly casually disregarded manifesto commitments in the past , but even if that were his justification , he should recognise that things have changed enormously since 2019 . the new extremist israeli government are moving from de facto to de jure annexation of the occupied territories . illegal settlements have been legalised and many more are planned , with the responsibility for them given to a far - right minister who denies the existence of the palestinian people and has been condemned by the board of deputies of british jews . today , we have seen the massive israeli attack on jenin , and not the first ; it follows months of raids across the west bank and on nablus . across the west bank , settler attacks — killing and injuring palestinians , torching their homes , their businesses and their cars — are being encouraged by the israeli government and those responsible are going unpunished . all that is designed to end the prospect of a viable palestinian state and frustrate attempts to secure a just settlement . those israeli civil society voices who support our ambition for a two - state solution have made it clear that there could not be a worse time for the uk to send a signal that we see the occupied territories as part of israel in the way that this bill is framed . we should not do it . i urge the government to think again . i draw the attention of the house to my declaration in the register of members ’ financial interests . it is a pleasure to follow i want to start with a challenge to my right hon . friend we need to ask ourselves some fundamental questions about what we expect of the occupied palestinians . if we present the bds movement in the very extreme way — described to me as “ disingenuous ” by someone who has messaged me in the course of this debate — it has been presented in this house , we are denying the palestinians in that sense by banning their only legitimate way of expressing resistance to that occupation . that is where we need to take a step or two back . we are now on the receiving end of more than 50 years of illegal israeli occupation of somebody else ’s territory . in an egregious way , israel has occupied and settled that territory with 700,000 jewish people . the physical result of those settlements is that a two - state solution is now in effect impossible . there needs to be some serious consideration of the implications of israeli policy , because it has been deliberate . we sit here parroting our support for a two - state solution , and the only point of difference i have with my hon . friend i hope that hon . members on the front bench will reflect that the people who convinced me of that were the negotiation support unit that the department for international development was paying for in 2002 to give the palestinian negotiators a bit of capacity and heft in conducting negotiations with their israeli counterparts . diana buttu and michael tarazi were themselves then in favour of a one - state solution . what is wrong with that as a vision ? indeed , it would mirror the original sense of moral purpose about the state of israel . it was a great achievement of the 20th century to find a homeland for the jewish people , who have been on the wrong end of history for hundreds and hundreds of years , particularly the appalling policies towards jewish people in europe . i say to my colleagues : do not try to present the one - state solution as a terrorist answer driving israelis and jews into the sea — that is absolute nonsense and of course it will never happen . if we are about trying to create national reconciliation and a path to peace , we need now to start thinking originally . palestinians are looking over the wall at israel and , strangely enough , young professional palestinians want what the israelis have . i do not think that israelis in a similar position want to send their children , in 20 , 30 or 40 years ’ time , to police the occupation . we see today the terrible events in jenin , which are a product of the disaster and false horizon that the oslo process has turned out to be for the palestinian people . there is desperate anger in occupied parts of palestine , where everything is being taken away from people , but here we are attacking a movement that tries — although , of course , there are elements of unacceptable rhetoric — to stay within the limits of peaceful resistance to illegal occupation . it would be thought absolutely astonishing that we are faced with this measure in the british parliament . we need to think back on our history and the balfour declaration . there were two parts to that declaration . we have delivered on one of them , but i am afraid that the rights of the people who were living in the territory that is now israel have been violated in the most profound and fundamental way . we now have to deal with the dispossession that came of the establishment of the state of israel . we need to deal with the results of this illegal occupation . we in this house are about to take away not only the ability to seek peacefully the means to do that through local authorities , but people ’s right to express support for it . this is a very un - conservative measure and it needs to be rejected at the first opportunity , which is this evening , and that is how i will be voting . it is a pleasure to follow like many others , i think this is a sordid and grubby little bill that takes away many of the political freedoms that we have enjoyed for decades in this country . it follows , of course , similar pieces of legislation from the government over the past few years . they have sought to restrict our freedom to dissent and protest , but this bill goes further , as others have already remarked upon . for the first time that i can remember , the bill seeks to criminalise thought as well as deeds . that takes it into a whole new dimension and is reason enough for it to be thrown out by this house tonight . we live in a dangerous and uncertain world . humanity faces many challenges , some of them existential in nature . i would argue that this is a time in our public discourse and public life when we need more moral judgments and ethical considerations , not fewer as the bill tries to suggest . in fact , the bill does not actually outlaw local authorities and public authorities taking ethical and moral judgments ; it simply outlaws them taking ones that the government disagree with . the government are trying to tape to themselves not just the legitimacy of being the elected political administration of the country , but the role of arbiter and mouthpiece for all of civil society . that is quite ridiculous . as others have said , many people elect their public officials to represent their point of view , and they have a right to do so . if we constrain the ability of the representative , we also constrain the ability of the people . it is in the field of pension policy that this is most ridiculous . like others , i am , since the age of 60 , in receipt of a local government pension . that is because i paid into a savings fund for the years in which i worked in local government . it is my money and that of my fellow pensioners . what right do this government have to tell me what i can and can not do with my own money ? the government have sought to place the question of israel right at the heart of this legislation and of their argument . it is fundamentally based on a flawed premise : that criticism of the israeli government or of israeli state policies is in itself antisemitic . that is wrong . we in this house should never get ourselves into the position of thinking that we have to choose between defending the human and political rights of palestinians in the middle east , and fighting antisemitism on the streets of our own country and throughout the world . we can and we must do both . i had the privilege to attend last week a meeting called by yachad , a jewish organisation , in this house . i heard michael sfard , a distinguished human rights lawyer from israel , speak on the situation . he gave a concise picture of what is happening in israel today and described the actions of the current israeli government — the most right - wing , anti - palestinian government that israel has ever had . he described how two projects are under way in that area of the world at the moment : the first is the de jure annexation of the occupied palestinian territories into the state of israel , and the second is the changing of constitutional law inside the state of israel to allow that to happen . that is what has provoked mass demonstrations by the ordinary israeli public on the streets of israel , where hundreds of thousands of people are turning up to protest . that is what has led to a situation in which the current government of israel has opinion poll ratings down at 20 % . if there were an election today , they would be thrown out of office by a landslide . yet in the context of what is happening on the streets of the middle east at the moment , and of even the american administration trying to put distance between themselves and president netanyahu , what is the policy of the uk government ? their policy — an outlier in the international community — is to welcome the israeli administration with open arms . no one would be more pleased or gain more succour from the passing of such legislation than the current israeli administration , and no one would be more crestfallen about its passing than those of progressive liberal opinion inside the state of israel , who do not want that to happen . the choice that we need to make is whether we will stand with the people of israel and of palestine in protecting their human and political rights against a very right - wing anti - palestinian administration , or give succour — almost alone in the world in doing so — to that administration . i have already run out of time , madam deputy speaker , but let me finish with this . we have to ask ourselves why the bill comes at this particular time , in the middle of all the crises in the world and the domestic economic crises right here on our own doorstep . why this piece of legislation at this particular time ? i think i join the front - bench spokespeople in their tributes to the late lord kerslake . i will never forget the help and advice that he gave me on delivering the homelessness reduction act 2017 . it is sadly ironic that the kerslake commission , on which i was proud to serve , was due to meet tomorrow to approve a long - awaited report , but it has been cancelled because of his sad death . i congratulate my right hon . friend the secretary of state on this long - awaited bill , in which we take on — let us be clear — the bds movement directly . this legislation is an endeavour for which i have been campaigning for many years , and i thank him for his tireless work in bringing this policy to fruition . i listened carefully to the house will be aware that the ability for public bodies to take powers unto themselves that should correctly be reserved for the government has sown division and discord across our nations . calls for universities to sever ties with academic partners in israel have led to a great number of prejudicial motions at our institutions , isolating and alienating jewish students . the national union of students has reported that anti - israel hatred is plainly linked to the racist treatment of british jews , corroborating findings from the community security trust , which found that campus antisemitism has hiked by 22 % in the past year alone . this brand of student politics should not be permitted at our universities , let alone in our great democratic institutions . this is not news . when i was at university the same things went on — and that was a long time ago . speaking of democracy , i shall elaborate on the claim that i have heard in recent days that this bill somehow harms our commitment to free speech . i believe that it is the proponents of bds who are pitting one community against another , which results in a chilling effect on honest debate . it is intimidation , marginalisation and incitement to hatred . i agree with my right hon . friend “ successive studies have shown the single best statistical predictor of anti - jewish hostility is the amount of bds activity”.—[official report , hon . members do not have to take my word for it . omar barghouti , founder of the bds movement , wrote 20 years ago in 2003 that “ the two - state solution for the palestinian - israel conflict is finally dead … the more just , moral and therefore enduring alternative ... the one - state solution ... where , by definition jews will be a minority ” . the bds national committee , the directive organ of the bds movement , has on its board organisations including the council of national and islamic forces in palestine , and a coalition of proscribed terrorist groups , including hamas , palestinian islamic jihad , the popular front for the liberation of palestine , and many others . the council ’s leader , khaled al - batsh , acts as a senior official for palestinian islamic jihad . the council ’s general co - ordinator , mahmoud nawajaa , has publicly supported the armed wing of hamas , the terrorist organisation that heinously murdered three british nationals — a mother and her two daughters — in april . today in holland , two bds fundraisers were arrested for securing € 5 million to go directly to hamas . the propositions set out in the bill are a safeguard against the rising tide of discrimination and double standards , and will provide the balance crucially needed in our national conversation . the bill will empower the government to introduce secondary legislation to enforce a boycott of states committing human rights abuses . in response to colleagues who have cited particular countries , that means that the government can introduce those measures through secondary legislation . in turn , public bodies will be able legitimately to advance their own trade sanctions in support of the national interest , as determined by the democratically elected government . surely , that is welcome . this is precisely what will , i hope , happen shortly in relation to russia . the bill will inevitably generate much debate , but i restate its importance in protecting the government ’s foreign policy interests , the jewish community and the wellbeing of the many citizens who have grown tired of grandstanding public bodies exploiting the public purse and the money on which they depend . the government will have my full support on this important matter . i listened carefully to the shadow spokesperson , who gave a very reasonable speech . when the bill goes into committee — i hope that it will go into committee — all these different elements should be examined carefully to make sure that we end up with a bill which , i hope , can command the support of the overwhelming majority in the house . it is genuinely an honour to speak in this debate . there have been some incredible contributions , and i pay tribute to my hon . friend this is a difficult bill . it is one of the most freedom - damaging , human rights - destroying pieces of legislation that i have ever seen . it is badly drafted and ill thought - through . i take issue with the bill will , as we have heard , prevent public bodies from making decisions to procure goods or services , or invest or divest according to their own ethical framework . local authorities have long played an important role in the protection and promotion of human rights overseas , for example , in opposing the apartheid regime in south africa , as members have mentioned . the bill will make the westminster government the ultimate arbiter of what is acceptable . as the reasoned amendment sets out , the bill is a clear and obvious fetter on the principle of devolution and on freedom of speech . by hamstringing the due diligence that public bodies carry out , it will entirely disregard the european convention on human rights . the bill will be a disaster for the environment and the drive to net zero , by withdrawing the freedom of public bodies to boycott countries that pollute our environment . as for palestine , which has been the subject of a lot of attention in this debate , the legal opinion of richard hermer kc , commissioned by labour front benchers , states that “ legislation prohibiting local authorities from taking steps to promote palestinian self - determination within the opt , taken with the terms of the exclusion in clause 3(7 ) , would likely place the united kingdom in breach of international law obligations . ” labour ’s amendment points to the way in which that clause conflates the occupied palestinian territories and the golan heights with the state of israel , undermining the uk ’s long - standing cross - party position , and running contrary to un security council resolutions , specifically resolution 2334 . by singling out the territories under israel ’s control in this legislation , the uk will give licence to the continuation of the terrible events that unfolded in jenin today , without an appropriate , legitimate and peaceful response . no other people should be put in the position of the palestinians . at this very moment , we are seeing the images from jenin , where a massive number of israeli occupation forces are committing what the palestinian president has called a “ war crime ” as they storm the city and refugee camp . they have killed at least nine palestinians , including three children , and injured countless innocent civilians . over 180 palestinians have been killed by israeli forces since the beginning of 2023 — about one a day . at least 34 of those have been children . the destruction of schools , homes and lives is being carried out with total impunity . how many times have we heard warm and ineffective words from ministers at the dispatch box ? one wonders how such an attitude and policy would have played out in respect of south africa . the tory government of the day deemed the south african apartheid regime legal , and nelson mandela a terrorist . if that policy had succeeded , he would have been left to rot in jail . what has happened to any sense of a moral compass in our country ? have we forgotten the lessons of the anti - apartheid struggle in south africa ? the bill would make it an offence for someone from a public body to say that , if not for the legislative ban contained in the bill , they would have chosen to pursue some form of sanction . that has been rightly called a “ minority report ” provision and i know it worries many members across this house . the bill is wholly incoherent , given how we have rightly imposed sanctions on russia following its illegal invasion and occupation of ukrainian territory . the bill is simply wrong — an offence against human decency and international law . i will be exercising one of my human rights , the freedom of expression and of conscience , by voting consistently against it at every stage . it is unworthy of this house and i have no doubt that history will judge it so . i urge members to support the reasoned amendment , but to reject the bill in its entirety . i declare my interests as a vice - president of the local government association and the co - chair of the all - party parliamentary group on british jews . i am privileged to represent a very diverse constituency with a large and established jewish population , and indeed many people from every possible religious background . it is great to see that , on the whole , those different communities get on extremely well , but this legislation is necessary for the reasons that many members have outlined . as the second piece of important context goes to the point that was raised by the next issue is the way in which these powers are exercised in respect of contractors and subcontractors . on , for example , an investment committee or a procurement committee charged with making decisions to place contracts , elected members may not necessarily be aware of the decisions and policies of the bodies with which they are contracting . it is not unusual for a local government pension committee to have 15 to 20 investments at any one given time . given that those private companies may themselves be under similar pressure to exercise bds views , what is not always going to be transparent to those elected members is how those things are taking effect in practice . we need to ensure that , in bringing in what is intended to be about decision makers in public bodies , we are not losing our desired intention to ensure that bds is not present in the public sector by ensuring that those bodies that are contracting or subcontracting are also within sight . again on my concern in respect of how these decisions will affect elected members in local authorities , the legislation envisages that it will apply where matters are in line with , or outside of , the policy of the government . paragraph 9 of the explanatory notes sets out the example of where a specific legislative provision was introduced in respect of sanctions against russia following the invasion of ukraine . it is my view that when this legislation passes we need to be completely clear what we mean when we talk about the policy of the government . do we mean as expressed in legislation ? do we mean as expressed by the minister at the dispatch box ? what is it that we mean when we talk about the policy of the government ? is it a policy of different government departments ? we need to make sure , given that it would be a breach of the law to express opposition to it , that the position from which the policy of the government is drawn is absolutely clear . it is a pleasure to follow a truly appalling piece of legislation has been put before us . it fits into the bigger picture of anti - democratic legislation that this government have put forward that reduces the rights of free speech and assembly , over - empowers the police , restricts trade unions and tries to criminalise people who seek a place of safety and asylum on our shores . we have to put it in that context ; it is yet another attack on the civil liberties of people in this country . over 70 organisations have expressed deep misgivings and opposition to the bill . muslim organisations , jewish organisations , trade unions , human rights organisations , libertarian organisations , religious groups and many others have said that the bill is wrong and that it will damage the civil liberties of everyone in this country . it gives massive power to the secretary of state effectively to decide what local authorities can say , think or do . if a local authority , for example , decided it wanted to speak up about human rights in a country when a significant number of people from that country were living in its community — for example , there is a very large somali community in my constituency — would my local authority not be allowed to say anything about somalia under the bill ? it would have to seek the permission of the secretary of state before it could do anything , and so it goes on ; there are so many other examples . having been in this house since the 1980s , i sat through many debates about south africa . there were many members over there on the government benches — many — who supported the apartheid regime . they openly supported the apartheid regime , called mandela a terrorist and asked for the banning of the african national congress in this country . the anc had its offices in my borough , and the south west africa people ’s organisation , which led to the liberation of namibia , had its offices in my constituency . there were calls to ban them and , when local authorities such as sheffield led the way on local authority action and opposition to apartheid , they faced sanctions from the government . why were they so concerned about it , other than to prevent any effective , peaceful show of loyalty and support to the people of south africa who were facing the horrors of the apartheid regime ? under this legislation , what we did over south africa would be impossible or illegal , so we would end up suspending councillors , prosecuting local authorities and surcharging councillors . i am not sure where it would lead . some of us supported the people of chile after general pinochet seized power , and called for a boycott of chilean goods and a non - investment policy in chile ; again , that would be illegal . on a different basis , some of us called for a boycott of californian grapes when californian grape pickers were facing oppression from police forces in california ; again , that would be illegal . all the issues around the world that we are faced with , such as indonesia ’s behaviour in west papua , the failure of morocco to allow a referendum on the future of western sahara , saudi arabia and its war against yemen — any expression of that would be banned by the bill . a terrifying bill has been put forward here today . most of the bill has been framed around palestine and israel . many groups in israel are frightened by the bill and what goes with it and also believe that there should be justice for the people of palestine . i spent saturday evening talking to mustafa barghouti of the palestinian national initiative , who believes in non - violent resistance to the occupation . he pointed out to me — i noted the figures down as he was talking — that , at the moment on the west bank , there are 150 settlements , 70 more settlements are being planned or actually built at present , more than 400,000 israeli people have been moved into those settlements and it is impossible for palestinian people to move around their own area of land . the idea that the products made on those settlements that are sold outside should be seen as legitimate products — they are illegal within terms of international law and within terms of eu law . so i just ask that we understand the importance of the right of protest . today in jenin , as an example of the occupation , 14,000 people are in a refugee camp that is less than 0.4 square kilometres—14,000 people in less than half a square kilometre of land . israel defense forces says that it is not targeting civilians . it is impossible to use any kind of weaponry against the population there without targeting civilians . more have died . more bitterness , more hatred and more problems come down the road . those people all around the world who want to support the palestinian people are not antisemitic . they are not anti - israeli groups , but what they do want is justice for the palestinian people . that surely would be a much better and stronger message to send out from this house today , rather than the attempt to close down free speech in this country . three decades ago , margaret thatcher said that the anc was a “ typical terrorist organisation ” , adding “ anyone who thinks it is going to run the government in south africa is living in cloud - cuckoo land ” . history proved her wrong on that , but that history was shaped by the determined efforts of people worldwide , including millions in this country and many local governments , to boycott south africa . the lesson is clear : governments are not always right ; governments do not always make moral decisions ; governments do not always act in line with the wishes of the population , but through the democratic process , millions of people can effect change . this bill ignores that lesson . it shuts down the freedom of people to exercise a key democratic right . it is just another example of this government ’s anti - democratic crackdown , with restrictions on the right to vote , the right to protest and the right to strike . labour ’s reasoned amendment , which declines to give the bill a second reading and which i will be supporting , makes the case clearly about the many deep flaws in the bill , as did the shadow secretary of state in her response . in summary , the bill is a huge attack on the concept of ethical investment and procurement by preventing public bodies from being influenced by “ political or moral disapproval ” of the actions of any foreign state . the government claim that boycott and divestment will still be possible , but just not where it “ relates specifically or mainly to a particular foreign territory ” . that simply does not wash . almost all cases of companies engaging in human , labour or environmental abuses have a territorial element . if we are talking about divesting in companies that cut down the rainforest , for example , that activity will obviously take place in areas with rainforests , and certain countries would be targeted by campaigns . this bill even bans public bodies from saying they would support such boycotts were it legal to do so . it is a gagging bill that breaches freedom of speech and would prevent a local councillor in hustings debates or other public forums from giving their political view . this bill also has chilling elements in how it will be enforced , including potentially huge fines and far - reaching information compliance notices . the aim is clear : to put so much fear into public bodies of ending up in court that they do not just act within the law , but go beyond it in an effort to reduce that risk . as legal advice provided to the labour party makes clear , this bill would be likely to place the uk “ in breach of international law obligations ” and “ effectively equates the occupied palestinian territories with israel itself and is very difficult to reconcile with the long - standing position of the united kingdom which supports a ‘ two - state solution ’ based on ‘ 1967 lines ’ in which the security and right to self - determination of both israelis and palestinians are protected . ” i am afraid that i do not have any faith in the exemptions listed in the bill at schedule 3 . just as apartheid was legal in south africa , much environmental destruction takes place entirely legally . the very fact that something is illegal is often the rationale for a boycott and divestments campaign in the first place . many people in the discussion today and around this bill have mentioned boycotts — not just those relating to illegal settlements in the occupied palestinian territories , where we have seen terrible scenes today in jenin , but arms boycotts against saudi arabia over its war crimes in yemen , boycotts in colombia over its past treatment of trade unionists , and commercial boycotts of goods relating to the treatment of the uyghurs in china or the rohingya in myanmar . it is not for us to decide which countries people are allowed to boycott — that is a huge curtailment of basic freedom . we need to maintain the democratic rights of people to challenge government policy through boycotts and divestment , if that is their wish . to conclude , the bill has faced widespread civil society opposition , including from the quakers and the methodists , the muslim association of britain , friends of the earth , the union of jewish students , the tuc , unite the union , unison and the directors of 14 israeli civil society and human rights organisations , as well as human rights watch , liberty and amnesty , whose own legal ruling suggests that the bill would be illegal . not all those groups support boycotts , but they do support the right for people to boycott . that is what we are voting on today . we can not allow the government to scrap this cherished democratic right . reference has been made to bob kerslake consistently throughout today . bob and i were friends . i go back longer than most , because i go back to 1981 , when i was a young man and a glc councillor and bob was a young man and a glc officer . i fully concur with all the tributes that have been paid , but i also want to say that he was a good man . he was a very good person and a good friend , and we will miss him . let me come on to this debate . i do not want to repeat some of the arguments , but i want to get on record for my constituents why i am voting the way i am this evening . i will vote in solidarity with the amendment , and i congratulate my hon . friend the debate has largely focused on the specific bds movement and israel . just to follow my hon . friend i was arrested there . he was arrested ; i was not . i was there on christmas day simply singing carols . you got off lightly . i got off lightly . all we were singing for was the release of nelson mandela . for the other one , i plead guilty . i was one of the organisers of the demonstrations over a decade ago against the royal visit of the saudi leaders . we were calling for no public contracts to be awarded to companies operating in saudi arabia , because at that time they were beheading gay people for being gay . that was later focused on military support from this country for the saudi attacks on yemen . the list of bds campaigns that i have supported goes on and on . i campaigned against the bahraini regime and its ongoing brutal repression of the country ’s democratic movement , and the continued imprisonment of opposition political leaders . we have met some of them over the years , and they are still inside . i have campaigned against the sri lankan administration owing to their genocidal attack on the tamils , with their continued abuse of human rights , their use of torture , the disappearances , and the colonisations of tamil homelands . again , i have lost constituents who have been disappeared when they have gone out there . i campaigned for sanctions against the military junta in myanmar to halt the attacks on the rohingyas and to demand the freedom of aung san suu kyi . yes , i have supported the boycott of goods coming from the palestinian territories occupied illegally by israel . the campaign in my constituency was undertaken by young people when the bombings in gaza were killing young people there . in solidarity , young people in my constituency went round the local shops asking them to check where their goods were coming from and urging them not to sell goods from the occupied territories . there has been some reference to bds campaigns being associated with antisemitism . that is not what i have witnessed in my constituency , but if there is evidence that individuals associated with these campaigns are antisemitic , we already have laws to deal with that , and i believe that the full force of the law against racist behaviour should therefore be deployed . more recently , i have called for sanctions against the chinese government for the barbaric treatment of the uyghurs , and also because they have imprisoned a group of my unite trade union friends who worked with me on the british airways campaigns . all they were demanding was adherence to democracy by the chinese , and they have been inside for two and a half years , without any form of access to their families in many instances . the common factor in all those campaigns is that they would not have been supported by government policy . therefore , they would have been rendered illegal in their demand for action by public authorities to boycott , disinvest and sanction . i agree with all those campaigns have focused on pressing for action from government , local councils , pension funds , private companies and investors . it is interesting that a few hon . members have mentioned the focus on the local government pension fund . i declare an interest as a member of the local government pension fund , and i think it is up to members of the fund to determine its investment policies . i must say , as a constituency mp , that the campaigns have reflected the diversity of my constituency . there is not a campaign that has not involved a constituent or group of constituents or has not been asked for by my constituents . it is a matter of standing in solidarity . the advice of every human rights lawyer i have spoken to so far , and all the briefings from human rights groups and trade unionists , have all made it clear that that range of activities will be outlawed and it will be made illegal for decision makers even to talk about the strategy . that is why i oppose the bill . i am voting against it because we have heard today , right across the house , that not a single clause has stood up to scrutiny . therefore , i do not believe it can be amended ; it is fundamentally flawed and should be defeated . let me make one final point , as an aside . we should change the standing orders or look at “ erskine may ” , because it would have been useful if the secretary of state coming here to present the bill had actually read it or addressed the same bill that we are addressing in this debate . all we saw today was a diatribe of the lowest politics we have seen for a long time , which divides our community unnecessarily and , to be frank , appallingly . let me be absolutely clear that the bill before this house , which should be rejected , is not just bad and unworkable but fundamentally flawed and dangerous . hon . members across the house have rightly stated that it does not just prevent public bodies such as local councils involving themselves in foreign policy — as the government innocently declare — but meddles in the autonomy of local government pension schemes to make the best investment decisions , and swings a wrecking ball through the uk ’s obligation to respect international law and countless united nations resolutions . the bill undermines the ability of public bodies and civic society to divest from those who are harming our environment and driving climate change . it provides the government with unprecedented and deeply alarming powers of enforcement that curtail freedom of expression and democracy by gagging public bodies that have the audacity to speak and act on their conscience . it forces public bodies and civic society to kneel , against their own moral convictions , to the secretary of state ’s foreign policy . most alarmingly , by preventing public bodies from adopting positions that deviate from this government ’s foreign policy of turning a blind eye to persecution , oppression and injustice in other countries , the bill quashes the ability of those individuals , public bodies and members of civic society with any sense of humanity to take a stand against human rights abuses , at a time of rapid increase in those abuses right across the world . each of those reasons alone is enough to bin the bill but , taken together , they make it not only one of the most far - reaching and dangerous pieces of legislation this government have ever sought to make law , but one of the most repressive . that is why it must be struck down today . as pointed out by hon . members across the house , the bill directly contradicts decades of established uk foreign policy on illegal israeli settlements built on occupied land . it is astounding that it has to be repeated in this chamber time and again that settlements in the occupied palestinian territories are illegal under international law . why does the bill not recognise that international position ? instead of introducing legislation to parliament that provides cover to the netanyahu government ’s illegal annexation of palestinian territory , ministers must decide whether they agree with the established position of the rest of the international community that the settlements and the israeli government ’s repeated disregard for international law are illegal . as hon . members have stated , the bill as it currently stands is in direct contravention of not just international law but united nations resolutions . many of us fear the anti - democratic precedent the bill will set . effectively , if a human rights campaign does not enjoy the support of the government , it will be criminalised for attempting to bring abuses to light . the uyghurs in xinjiang , the rohingya in burma , the palestinians in the occupied palestinian territories and the kashmiris in indian - occupied kashmir — members of those communities , many of whom are resident in my constituency , have now had their fear doubled . not only are they witnessing numerous human rights abuses in their countries of origin , they are now being silenced here , too . indeed , until just recently the uk government refused to approve sanctions against the burmese military despite the horrific genocidal campaign it waged against the rohingya , with ministers declaring that they did not want to unbalance what existed of burma ’s democratic government . instead , it was left to other organisations and groups to lead the resistance against a genocide taking place while the uk government looked on . the government are in a better place on that issue today , but we are still left with the question of what happens if there is a return to the same form of democratic government in burma that existed before and which allowed the rohingya genocide to take place . it is clear that ministers will lift sanctions and force local authorities to do the same through the bill , leaving the perpetrators of genocide able to escape justice and accountability for their grave crimes against humanity . the impact the bill will have on human rights in indian - occupied kashmir , where kashmiris continue to face persecution , oppression and injustice is even more alarming , because it is in this region that uk foreign policy under this tory government is not only most unreliable but most spineless . even as the indian government blatantly engage in violent , physical and psychological suppression of any resistance to the military occupation , however peaceful it may be , and seek to deter further opposition to their brutal rule by making an example of campaigners such as yasin malik , whose execution indian prosecutors are now seeking , all the uk government remain focused on is securing a trade deal with the right - wing modi government before the next general election . they could not even bring themselves to object to and boycott , as other countries did , the shameful decision to hold the g20 culture working group summit last month in srinagar . in the absence of the uk government stepping up to fulfil their historic , moral and international obligations to the region , it is once again left to local councils and public bodies to do what they can to protect human rights in indian - occupied kashmir by refusing to engage with those whose hands are stained with the blood of kashmiris . yet under the bill the government will put a stop to that and force public bodies to be party to human rights abuses because they think it is in the uk ’s best foreign policy interests . this rotten , unworkable and dangerous bill is an alarming overreach of government powers that breaks the uk ’s international obligations and undermines efforts to protect our environment and fight climate change . it protects human rights abusers in countless nations and gags democratically elected local representatives . we can not pick and choose which human rights abuses to act on and which to turn a blind eye to . let me be clear : human rights are a universal obligation and a universal right . it is time the uk government accepted that . i will therefore be standing up , as i always have done , for democracy , for our environment and for human rights by voting for today ’s amendment that will reject the bill . on first reading the bill , memories of my childhood came flooding back , when my family and i were very heavily involved in the south africa anti - apartheid movement in wales . that campaign deployed a range of campaign methods , including boycott , divestment and sanctions , and lobbying local councils to divest and use sanctions against south africa . we campaigned and succeeded in stopping a local choir from touring south africa , as well as boycotting goods . that was some of my formative political campaigning . it was legitimate , proportionate and all about challenging racism . it informs me on why i must oppose the bill in its entirety . this bill is the latest example of the shrinking space for freedom of expression in the uk , following the passage of the elections act 2022 , the police , crime , sentencing and courts act 2022 and the public order act 2023 , and the continued progress of the strikes ( minimum service levels ) bill . today ’s bill is an attack on democracy and rides roughshod over democratically elected representatives at a local , regional and devolved level . it is the epitome of cancel culture that the right - wing culture warriors on the conservative benches complain about so bitterly . it really does , as others have said , contain a direct threat to freedom of speech by barring public authorities from taking action and , indeed , from even making statements of policy . the bill will assist the suppression of campaigns for justice and accountability across the globe on issues as wide ranging as pollution , the environment , exploitation of children and women , and fossil fuel divestment — the list goes on . i and others who have spoken out against this bill are not alone in opposing it . a wide range of human rights organisations , lawyers , trade unions , charities , non - governmental organisations , faith groups , climate justice groups and cultural organisations share our concerns . and all of those would rightly reject the use of boycott tactics being used to stoke racism or antisemitism . the bill , as has been said , undermines elected local councils and regional mayors by not allowing them to make decisions that they have been democratically elected to make . it also clearly and definitely undermines the devolved settlement . what consultation has been carried out with the welsh government and the other devolved nations ? how will the bill impact on the devolved nations ’ procurement policies , which are currently being pursued and are ethical and have human rights considerations at their heart ? it has already been highlighted how this bill , while giving the government broad - brush powers to prevent criticism of any state government , uniquely privileges israel . that is despite its repeated and escalating human rights abuses in the west bank and gaza , and , as we are witnessing today , the horrific and heartbreaking events in jenin . despite assertions that foreign policy is unchanged , for the first time a piece of british legislation will require israel and the territories it illegally occupies to be treated in the same way , departing from decades of international consensus on the illegality of settlements . there is a proud record of the use of boycotts in progressive struggles — from the sugar boycotts of slavery abolitionists in the 18th and 19th centuries , to the anti - apartheid boycotts of south africa , divestment from fossil fuel companies and action against the russian invasion of ukraine . boycotts have been used legitimately , proportionately and often successfully to peacefully put political , economic or cultural pressure on a regime , institution or company to force it to change abusive , discriminatory or illegal policies . they have historically been anti - racist campaigns , and i believe that they must and will continue in the future . i want to finish with a quote from nelson mandela , who came to cardiff in 1998 : “ when the call for international isolation of the forces of apartheid went out to the world , the people of wales responded magnificently . the knowledge that local authorities all over wales were banning apartheid products from canteens and schools … was a great inspiration to us in our struggle . ” i believe that he too would have said that those opposing this bill in its entirety are on the right side of history . that is why i support the labour front - bench position to decline a second reading , and as a matter of conscience i must oppose the bill in its entirety . diolch yn fawr . it has been a joy to hear the different opinions expressed in the chamber today , both from those in favour of the bill and from those against it . i have to say to my good friends , as i call them , sitting near me in the chamber that my opinion differs from theirs , but that will not be a big surprise to them . i am a well - known friend of israel , and i make no apology for registering my interest and my support . having said that , i know that it will — again — come as no surprise to any member that i support the bill , and , indeed , i said as much to the secretary of state in an intervention earlier . the anti - israel sentiment that flourishes in the absence of legislation must be addressed . i know that some members who are present believe that the principle of boycotting has been used effectively for years , recalling the boycott of german goods , and i know of many a person who has boycotted a company in opposition to a decision or policy in that company . however , it is not the job of universities or other government - funded bodies to make the decision to boycott for a political reason without an outright decision in this place , which is why the bill is before us tonight . while some may also believe that only a principle is being debated today , the fact is that there is an active boycott against israel in some political circles , and it does have an effect . let me give some examples from northern ireland . in 2014 , the sinn féin mayor of what was then newry and mourne council wrote to shopkeepers in the council district requiring them to inform him about all the israeli goods that they stocked . in his capacity as mayor , he told local businesses in newry that unless they immediately withdrew israeli goods from sale , they were giving “ financial support , succour and legitimacy ” to “ apartheid ” and racism . well , no , they were not . those receiving the letter from the mayor — local shopkeepers and business people — understandably felt targeted , and some said that the letter struck them as deeply sinister , intimidating and extremely divisive . this boycott is clearly racially motivated , which is underlined by debates taking place on the israel issue . in a belfast city council debate on israel in 2019 , israel was presented by nationalist and marxist councillors as a unique evil in the world , requiring unique measures to be taken against it . people before profit councillors referred to israel ’s establishment and existence as a racist endeavour . well , no , it is not , but they said that it was . the reality of any conflict in the middle east was denied ; it was only their perceived jewish oppression of arabs . concerns expressed about growing antisemitism were shamelessly deflected and ridiculed ; it was just a deliberate tactic to silence criticism of israel . it was suggested by some councillors that only jews who held anti - zionist positions deserved the council ’s solidarity , a view that is perpetuated by the boycott of israeli goods on a global scale in which this nation has been a silent partner for so long . that is why the bill is so important . let me be clear : israel ’s existence and survival are vital to many in our jewish community as a matter of their core identity , religious faith , family connections and sense of physical safety and security . criticism of an israeli government or policy is one thing ; demonisation of israel as a unique evil , along with demands for the jewish state ’s elimination from the face of the earth , is quite another . demonisation , boycotts and expulsions directed against the world ’s only jewish state do not sit well with me or with my colleagues , and , indeed , should not sit well with any member of this house . local authorities in northern ireland , as elsewhere , should be working hard to support diversity and good relations , not isolating and undermining one of our smallest and much - cherished communities . recently , a media outlet in northern ireland published a letter from a self - styled interfaith group identifying the leadership of ireland ’s tiny jewish community with genocide and apartheid in the middle east . well , no , they do not do that . the letter called on the 80 jews in belfast to support their “ moderate ” aim of bringing down the zionist regime . to put it starkly , this is where the so - called bds campaign will lead if it is never properly called out and challenged : it will lead to the targeting and isolation of not just the jewish state , but those of us — and i am one — who consider ourselves friends of israel , including many members of our jewish community . let me give some more examples in the last couple of minutes available to me . family businesses in northern ireland , such as wilson ’s country ltd , were subjected to a vicious attack on social media because they stocked israeli new potatoes . an israeli - owned stall at castlecourt in belfast was regularly physically attacked , and its staff intimidated . some of these attacks were so serious that they led to custodial sentences . the stall was forced to close and has never returned . staff at the linen hall library in belfast complained of online bullying after it hosted an event celebrating the centenary of chaim herzog ’s birth in belfast . library staff were harangued . during the conflict in the middle east , belfast ’s synagogue had its windows smashed and the community ’s rabbi received threats and needed escorts to and from the synagogue . the community has frequently been targeted by online abuse . a county tyrone sports personality with an online following tweeted , “ if you ’re lucky enough to know a jew , punch him in the face . ” the psni is investigating . pubgoers in the bogside were recorded by an undercover israeli reporter telling him , “ jews are the scum of the earth . hitler did n’t kill enough of them . ” the psni is investigating . there were calls to cancel a friendly football match between northern ireland and israel . the israeli national team is more diverse than any other team in the world , because it includes jews , muslims and christians . again , the line of abuse is incredible . my last example is from 2016 , when derry city and strabane district council claimed to be the first local authority in northern ireland to pass a motion boycotting israeli goods . in 2018 , the same council voted that to have a friends of israel representative speak to the council to put their side of the case would be a disgrace to the city . it did not want to hear the other side of the argument . the voice of freedom and free speech was not heard . i will not be siding with the threat of expulsions , boycotts and isolation . i therefore welcome this bill , which will prevent our local authorities from being abused in this extreme and divisive manner . we in northern ireland have seen more of that than most . it is a pleasure to close this challenging but important debate on behalf of the opposition . the debate has covered britain ’s place in the world , freedom of speech , human rights , genocide and a whole range of other important topics . at the heart of the debate lies a central question : does the bill balance legitimate , strongly held and well - meant desires to challenge behaviours overseas on principled grounds against important protections for particular nations or regions in the face of disproportionate treatment ? i am afraid the answer is no . we believe there should be legislation to frame boycott and divestment - type activities — legislation that allows communities to decide where their money goes — in response to human rights or genocide concern , while ensuring such decisions are made equitably and consistently so that the world ’s only jewish state , for example , is not singled out and targeted . this is consistent with our long - held stance against the boycott , divestment and sanctions campaign against israel . colleagues can have confidence that we believe in such framing legislation , because the shadow secretary of state , my hon . friend my hon . friend there has been a range of other excellent contributions . the chair of the foreign affairs committee , the right hon . members for middlesbrough south and east cleveland ( sir simon clarke ) and for chipping barnet ( theresa villiers ) said that foreign policy matters of this nature are not for local decision makers . well , we do not think that is right . my hon . friend this bill is anti - democratic and anti - human rights . it frustrates peace efforts in the middle east and it is an obstacle to social justice everywhere . as such , it has been condemned by a huge range of civil society organisations , including trade unions , charities and faith organisations . does my hon . friend agree with them and with me that for those reasons the bill must not receive a second reading ? yes , i think that what has been striking is that colleagues who come at this from very different places and parties have reached that conclusion of the inadequacy of this legislation . i hope the government will reflect on that . my hon . friends the members for middlesbrough ( andy mcdonald ) and for cynon valley ( beth winter ) made important points about what this bill does to the devolved regional and national settlements — it challenges and presses them greatly . i will cover some more of the contributions as i get through the rest of my points , but certain concerns must be addressed by the minister in her closing remarks . first , which of the two possible readings of clause 1 do the government intend ? does the “ territorial consideration ” provision mean that not wishing to procure from xinjiang is unacceptable but that not wishing to procure from the entire nation of china would be acceptable ? or does it mean that all actions of all foreign governments are beyond the scope of local decision makers ? how , at this stage , can it be satisfactory that there is ambiguity ? as we have heard , this is legislation that will head straight to the courts . secondly , to accept clause 3 is to exalt the secretary of state ahead of any other public representative , as my right hon . friend we heard a powerful and compelling contribution from my neighbour , my right hon . friend the member for barking , about pernicious political thinking behind this bill . does my hon . friend agree that that has happened multiple times ? we are talking about a smackdown on democracy . we had the so - called “ gagging bill ” , which was about gagging charities and became the transparency of lobbying , non - party campaigning and trade union administration act 2014 ; in 2016 , we had the wrapping up of trade unions in even more red tape ; and , recently , we have had more attacks on trade unions and the right to protest . are the government not crushing dissent on the part of any organisation or body that wants to challenge them ? i am grateful for that intervention . my hon . friend almost reads to the end of my paragraph , so i will address that point presently . the point on gagging clauses was also made by my hon . friends the members for leeds east and for bradford east ( imran hussain ) , and the hon . members for reigate ( crispin blunt ) and for ruislip , northwood and pinner ( david simmonds ) . the bill means that not only does the judgment of the secretary of state supersede any and all local leaders , but the government seek to ensure that those leaders are not even allowed to talk about their desire to challenge human rights abuses or not to consume settlement goods . the government are taking away not only the right to act , but the ability to speak . as my hon . friend separately , but no less importantly , the bill will , as let me turn to an issue that has had little airing in the debate so far and will have a lot more to run . through clause 7 , the bill permits extraordinary powers to compel information — powers that demolish long - held legal privileges . it is not proportionate to hand to the secretary of state even stronger powers to compel information from public bodies than the security services have . surely the government see the unsustainability of that position . as detailed by labour and other colleagues , these are weighty concerns that make the bill unacceptable in its current form . but there is an alternative , as covered in our reasoned amendment . our country has a proud history in the development of modern international humanitarian law , from the ashes of world war two to the creation of the united nations and the role that we continue to play on the world stage . we have always defended the fundamental and inalienable rights of all human beings . it is vital that procurement decisions made in respect of such rights are then applied across the board to prevent unethical actions against specific states and to ensure that common actions have the greatest impact . that could be readily achieved by requiring public bodies to produce a document that sets out their policy on procurement and human rights , and for that to be developed in accordance with guidance published by the secretary of state . that would ensure consistency in how contracting authorities decide on such matters . what would that suggestion mean in practice ? the practical effect would be to make it clear and unambiguous that if a public body does not wish to procure goods from russia because of president putin ’s abhorrent human rights abuses in ukraine , the law will be on its side . if that same body does not wish to procure services from xinjiang because of the appalling treatment of uyghur muslims , the law will be on its side . but if a public body acts only against a particular state — let us say the world ’s only jewish state — while turning a blind eye to human rights abuses elsewhere , such actions would be illegal . we offer this workable solution to the government and i hope the minister picks it up . if colleagues do not hear that in the minister ’s response , i encourage them to vote in favour of the reasoned amendment tabled in my name and the names of my right hon . and hon . friends . i thank members from throughout the house for their impassioned and heartfelt contributions . let me remind the house why we have introduced this legislation : we believe that we should have one foreign policy , and we also believe that bds campaigns risk undermining community cohesion . we believe that public bodies should not be wasting time and money on pursuing their own foreign policy agendas and should instead focus on providing vital public services and delivering value for money for the taxpayer in their procurement and investment decisions . let me also clarify certain misapprehensions that certain members have about the bill . first , the bill applies only to public authorities . it does not apply to private individuals or private companies , except if they are exercising public functions . it does not place restrictions on local councillors , except when they talk expressly on the behalf of their local authority . it does not prevent public authorities from making statements on foreign policy ; it prevents them only from making a procurement or investment decision if it is motivated by moral or political disapproval of a foreign state ’s conduct . many members have mentioned clause 4 . i reassure members that clause 4 only prevents public authorities from making statements of intent to boycott or divest . it does not prevent public bodies from disagreeing with this legislation . the bill does not ban ethical , religious or socially conscious funds , so , for instance , climate change funds can continue with the bill unless there are issues that are country - specific . a number of members mentioned clause 3(7 ) . i want to clarify the role of the clause . the bill applies equally to all countries . countries can be exempted from the ban by secondary legislation , which is what we are planning to do with russia and belarus—[interruption . ] order . this has been a very good - natured and difficult debate . it has been held with disagreement , but courtesy across the house . people have now come into the chamber who have not been here during the debate and it is most discourteous of them now to make so much noise that we can not hear the minister . that is bad behaviour and it is bad for the way in which we do things in here , especially on a day when we have had a very well - constructed and conducted debate . thank you , madam deputy speaker . given the focus of the bds campaign on israel , we are simply saying in this clause that , for israel to be exempted from the legislation , it will require primary legislation . i want to make that very clear . this policy does not affect our foreign policy position . we are not legislating for the uk ’s foreign policy on israel or on any other country in the bill . the purpose of the bill is to ensure a consistent approach to foreign policy across our public bodies , led by the uk government . the bill will not prevent the uk government from imposing sanctions , or otherwise changing our foreign policy on any country in future . i stress that none of the provisions in the bill changes the uk ’s position on israeli settlements in the west bank and the golan heights . we are continuing to urge israel not to take steps that move us away from our shared goals of peace and security . we support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure israel living alongside a viable and sovereign palestinian state , based on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps , jerusalem as the shared capital of both states and a just , fair and realistic settlement for refugees . furthermore , our position on settlements is clear : they are illegal under international law ; present an obstacle to peace ; and threaten the physical viability of a two - state solution . our position is reflected in our continued support for un security council resolution 2334 , with which the bill is compliant . what the minister says is not really what is reflected in the bill because a specific exemption is given not just to israel , in what should be a country - agnostic bill — just like our manifesto commitment — but to two parts of israel which we do not recognise as part of israel under international law . therefore , there is specifically an exemption for israel . does she agree — the secretary of state said earlier that he would listen very carefully to suggested amendments — that this is something that needs to be worked on during the bill committee ? un security council resolution 2334 asks countries to differentiate between israel and the occupied territories . we have done that in this clause ; they are clearly separated out in different paragraphs . however , as the secretary of state said in his opening remarks , we are open to any discussions on the bill and of course we want the best legislation here . rose — i am very conscious that , in the interests of time , i only have a few minutes . my hon . friend knows the incredibly high esteem i hold her in , but it just is not credible to keep repeating that this does not change how we treat the golan heights , which have been annexed , and the occupied palestinian territories . the foreign office ’s own legal advice states that the bill could breach unsc 2334 . how am i being told repeatedly from the dispatch box that that is not the case , when that is what government lawyers are saying themselves ? we have a responsibility to uphold that resolution . we drafted this legislation and therefore we need to remove clause 3(7 ) . we on these back benches have offered a landing platform to the government : “ remove that clause . you can still do this . ” but please do not repeat that this does not change anything when the government lawyers themselves say it does . the government ’s view is that the bill is compliant with un security council resolution 2334 . i move on to the reasoned amendment , which rightly recognises the impact that boycotts and divestment campaigns can have on undermining community cohesion . the government , however , are resisting the amendment on the basis that this legislation is a robust and proportionate means of stopping public bodies engaging in divisive campaigns and of fulfilling our 2019 manifesto commitment . the amendment refers specifically to the uyghur muslims . this government are concerned about the issue of uyghur forced labour in supply chains and are taking robust action . the exceptions in this bill , alongside the exclusion grounds in the procurement bill , will keep suppliers involved in labour market misconduct , including human trafficking and modern slavery , no matter where they are in the world , out of public sector supply chains . we have already discussed the point on the occupied territories and the golan heights . the amendment claims that this bill limits freedom of speech , but that is not the case . private individuals and bodies are not affected by the legislation . the right to freedom of speech is protected by article 10 of the european convention on human rights and the government remain strongly committed to the uk ’s long and proud tradition of freedom of speech . the amendment also criticises the powers given to the secretary of state to enforce this ban . far from being the unprecedented powers claimed , they are modelled on existing powers of regulators such as the office for students and the pensions regulator . it would simply not be logical to impose a ban with a toothless enforcement regime . this legislation delivers an important manifesto commitment . it will ensure that the uk has a consistent foreign policy approach and speaks with one voice internationally . i look forward to working with hon . members throughout the bill ’s passage to deliver this important legislation and to continuing engagement on the issues that hon . members have raised in the house today . i commend the bill to the house . question put , that the amendment be made . the house divided : ayes 212 , noes 272 . question accordingly negatived . question put forthwith ( the house divided : ayes 268 , noes 70 . question accordingly agreed to . bill read a second time . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the following provisions shall apply to the economic activity of public bodies ( overseas matters ) bill : committal ( 1 ) the bill shall be committed to a public bill committee . proceedings in public bill committee ( 2 ) proceedings in the public bill committee shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion on ( 3 ) the public bill committee shall have leave to sit twice on the first day on which it meets . consideration and third reading ( 4 ) proceedings on consideration shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion one hour before the moment of interruption on the day on which those proceedings are commenced . ( 5 ) proceedings on third reading shall ( so far as not previously concluded ) be brought to a conclusion at the moment of interruption on that day . ( 6 ) other proceedings ( 7 ) any other proceedings on the bill may be programmed.—(scott mann . ) question agreed to . king ’s recommendation signified . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that , for the purposes of any act resulting from the economic activity of public bodies ( overseas matters ) bill , it is expedient to authorise the payment out of money provided by parliament of : ( a ) any expenditure incurred under the act by the secretary of state or by the treasury ; and ( b ) any increase attributable to the act in the sums payable under or by virtue of any other act out of money so provided.—(scott mann . ) question agreed to . ordered , that , at this day ’s sitting , motion made , and question put forthwith ( question agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft healthcare ( international arrangements ) ( eu exit ) regulations 2023 , which were laid before this house on that the draft international atomic energy agency ( immunities and privileges ) ( amendment ) order 2023 , which was laid before this house on question agreed to . motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(scott mann . ) it is a pleasure to lead this debate on crime and antisocial behaviour in west london . i am pleased that this debate comes so soon after my most recent crime survey for residents . we had more than 300 responses this time , and the results were sadly more shocking , more worrying and more concerning than those from our last survey in 2019 . while the title of the debate covers west london , i know that the experiences and challenges we face in my constituency are felt across london and the whole of england . i want to discuss four central themes today : my constituents ’ own experience with crime , based mainly on my recent constituent crime survey ; the responses of the metropolitan police ; the response of the government ; and , finally , what we can and should do to tackle crime and keep people safe . i could have started this debate by reeling off a long list of figures and statistics about crime and policing , but i will not . debates about crime are not abstract . it is not a line on a bar chart , but so much more . it is often a life shattered , confidence taken away and a hole left behind . take one constituent who contacted me after a string of car thefts outside their home . they told me : “ we are scared to walk outside alone , we are scared to wear a watch , we are scared for the safety of our children . ” that is what crime does . crime has an acidic and poisonous impact on communities , whether that is cars being violently stolen outside of houses , homes being broken into , schoolchildren being mugged at knifepoint or young people afraid of getting involved and being sucked into gang activity . i congratulate my hon . friend on securing the debate . does she agree that it is a wake - up call when children tell their mums they are afraid to walk home through the high street after school ? that is taking away their childhoods . my hon . friend is absolutely right . children are afraid of being the victims of crime . they are also afraid of the gangs . too many parents and young children are being targeted and , once sucked in , if they do not have the money to pay the gangs back , it is difficult to get out . i will come to that later . the fear that crime puts into victims lasts so much longer than the time taken to experience and report the crime itself . something wider has also emerged in recent years : a sense of broken britain . people tell me of seeing drugs being dealt openly in plain sight , bike theft and phone theft becoming virtually legal due to the lack of policing response , and fraud and cyber - crime becoming more and more widespread . there is a sense that this is a country where certain forms of crime simply happen without any consequence . recently , even calling 999 was a futile gesture that led nowhere . i will touch briefly on the responses i received to my recent constituency crime survey . of those who responded , 35 % had been victims of crime in the last 12 months . the most common thefts were vehicle theft and catalytic converter theft . west london is at particular risk because of the a4 and m4 passing through , which allows for a quick getaway . for years , i have been raising the issue of catalytic converter theft with the home office . as we know , they are stolen to order and passed on for the valuable materials they contain . one of the many policing ministers told me that the government would consider a review of the scrap metal dealers act 2013 if necessary . will the minister tell me whether the home office is doing that review ? if so , when will we hear of any likely action ? his script might mention the national vehicle crime working group , which apparently meets regularly , but will he tell the house how it measures its outcomes ? in my survey , the top three areas of priority for constituents were burglaries , violent and sexual crimes , and drug - related crimes . antisocial behaviour was also frequently bought up , and it is also raised when i meet constituents , although the phrase rather obscures just what that crime is . whether it is constant fly - tipping on estates , long - running harassment campaigns against neighbours or illegally modified bikes speeding through parks , it feeds into the sense of hopeless and powerless and the sense that our justice system is simply not working as it should . my hon . friend is being generous in giving way . does she agree that when residents contact us , contact the police and contact others for help , they have the feeling that the answers are there but those who should be helping them — local authorities and the police in particular — are not responding and not joining up to ensure swift action and cutting this off so that residents and communities can live in safety ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . the problem with antisocial behaviour is that it is often dealt with as “ no crime ” . it is true that there are more serious crimes that need to be dealt with , but , for so many , antisocial behaviour feels like the thin end of the wedge . there is a thread connecting these crimes that impact on all of our constituents , and asb in particular : the sense that they are allowed to happen in plain sight . there is an assumption that the police are at the core of the solution . in some ways , they are . i am grateful to my hon . friend for securing the debate . she is describing something familiar to all of us in west london . in the post - covid period , there has been a rapid increase in antisocial behaviour , vehicle crime and drug - related crime . i have an active local authority that has more cctv cameras per head of population than any other in the country and which has employed 70 law enforcement officers of its own . what is missing is the neighbourhood policing that we used to have that reassured local communities and gathered intelligence . that really did make a contribution to both reassurance and keeping crime down , and that is what we need back . i agree . we remember the time in the noughties when we had five officers for every ward , but they have been cut to less than half that . let me talk about the role of the metropolitan police . i am grateful for my regular meetings with chief superintendent wilson and other inspectors in hounslow , and for the fact that commissioner mark rowley has met london mps frequently , including last week . in hounslow , i have been on a walkabout both in osterley and in isleworth , and in a response car all around my constituency . i have had the chance to see just how well local officers know our community and how hard they work . however , there is a huge gap between those positive experiences and the wider services provided by the met , as we know from both the casey report and the experiences of our constituents . i am well aware of the work that metropolitan commissioner mark rowley is doing to try to turn around the appalling prejudices of a number of police officers and the generic responses that all victims of crime get , so that people have some confidence in the core service . we look forward to seeing significant progress on that before too long . many residents , constituents and businesses have told me that when they have reported crimes , they receive either not a proper response or no response at all . they get a crime reference number — that is it . a crime reference number is not justice served . that is commissioner mark rowley ’s task . the lack of response feeds into the sense of powerless and unfairness . people want the police to investigate , catch the criminals and stop crime from reoccurring . mark rowley has promised to turn around the ship and restore trust in the met . that trust needs to be rebuilt urgently . i want to focus on the conservative government , who have overseen the last 13 years of broken promises on policing across england . first , there was the decision to cut 20,000 experienced police officers . in london , more than 2,000 were cut , and in hounslow borough , 80 experienced officers were cut . they knew their communities and knew the appropriate response to ensure that information was gathered and conflict situations were not escalated . those experienced officers have , too often , gone . does my hon . friend agree that the way in which the cuts took place and police were taken from our communities has had an impact on the relationship between the police and our residents ? the loss of knowledge of people , their lives and communities , and those in our schools , has had an impact on that trust and familiarity , which go such a long way to preventing crime and giving reassurance . my hon . friend explains so clearly the points that we made back then when the cuts were being made . when i was deputy leader of hounslow council , we said that the cuts would have consequences , and my hon . friend just described them perfectly . so , what has happened ? the government have realised that they made a mistake , and are providing funding to re - recruit those vacancies . however , recruiting is difficult . the experience has gone out the door . getting new people in involves cost and training , and it takes years for knowledge to be built up . there are not the number of keen , competent and experienced recruits the metropolitan police so badly needs , particularly from within london . as my hon . friend local groups have had to fill the gap . one group i have worked with is action isleworth mothers . it is just one of many community groups across west london working tirelessly to support families , in particular young people at risk of being exploited by gangs . for three years astrid edwards , who founded aim , has been working unpaid with mothers and their sons to support them in keeping away , or getting away , from gangs . she can not do that alone . she has worked hard , using a progressive public health approach , to ensure key agencies in the borough — schools , the police , social services , housing , mental health and youth offender services — get out of their silos and work together . after three years of doing that unfunded , aim now has funding from hounslow council and the mayor of london ’s violence reduction unit to be the lead facilitator for the hounslow parent - carer champion network to provide peer support to parents whose children are , or may be , at risk of serious youth violence , criminal exploitation and/or getting involved in the criminal justice system . meanwhile , the government have been bystanders on the issue of crime and the causes of crime . on their watch , the number of arrests has halved , prosecutions have almost halved and the number of crimes solved has halved . more crimes are being reported , but fewer crimes are being solved . criminals are getting away with it . do n’t worry , the home secretary is working hard — but only to prepare her leadership bid . she is often missing in action and seems to talk about crime only when she thinks she can get a cheap hit and headline out of it . i hope to finish on a slightly more positive note by saying that we have seen some signs of improvement locally in recent months . we have a new dedicated policing team in hounslow town centre , made up of over 20 officers , focused on the high street which has been a hotspot for crime . businesses and shoppers say that it has made a positive difference . does my hon . friend agree that the way our police and local authorities work with other organisations , such as no shame in running , run by garvin snell , and project turnover , working with children on the very edge of crime , is really important , and that our institutions must have the capacity to support those who do such frontline work in our communities ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . some of the most effective work is being done by people of , and from , the community — people like garvin snell and organisations such as aim . they know the young people and they know the parents , but they can not do it alone . they must work in partnership with statutory agencies . i am glad to say that in the borough of hounslow there is better working together and less silo working between key public services . only then , when we see the child as a whole and work around the child as a whole , can we support them in keeping away from crime and gang activity . one other success , following my intervention , was the installation of cctv cameras behind a local estate and extra police patrols after residents contacted me about crime gangs using the alleyway for a quick getaway . to feel safe , all communities need a visible police presence , proactive community work and engagement with the local council . that is why my right hon . friend i congratulate we are clearly all extremely concerned about the effect of antisocial behaviour : the effect it has on our communities and the way that it can undermine residents ’ feeling of safety in their own neighbourhoods . whether it is a high street , a local park or a playground , people should be able to feel safe on their own streets and not feel any sense of fear or menace . the hon . lady is right to say that antisocial behaviour should not be considered a low level or minor thing , because it affects how people feel in their own neighbourhoods . for that reason , it is a very important topic , and i am glad that we have an opportunity to discuss it this evening . the hon . lady started by saying that she did not want to talk about figures . however , although the stories are important and we will talk about how people feel , it is also important to have a firm statistical grasp of what is actually happening . as members will know , the only statistically approved measure of crime in england and wales is the crime survey , endorsed by the office for national statistics , which says that it is the only reliable long - term measure of crime . if we look at the figures since 2010 , just to take an arbitrary year , we will see that violence has reduced by 41 % , criminal damage by 68 % and various forms of theft by about 40 % . we have , therefore , seen dramatic reductions in crime , as reported by the crime survey , over the past 13 years , but we should not be complacent , and we clearly need to do a lot more . one thing that we have in our armoury to fight antisocial behaviour is police officers . the hon . lady spoke passionately and eloquently about that . it is particularly welcome that we now have a record number of police officers across england and wales—149,572 , to be precise , which is about 3,000 more than we had in march 2010 . there are now more than 35,000 officers in london — every member present is a london mp — which is more officers than it has ever had at any time in its history . that is thanks to the police uplift programme that the government funded . rose — i will give way to the hon . gentleman in a moment . london could have had another 1,000 officers on top of that , funded by the government , but unfortunately sadiq khan was not able to organise himself to hire them , which is a great shame . i am sure that labour members , including i just want to give the minister a quick reality check . if he is right that crime is massively down , why are my constituents telling me every day that there is a feeling of lawlessness on the streets that they have not experienced before ? offences include drug offences and cars being broken into and stolen . if he has replaced the 20,000 officers that the government initially got rid of , why , as my hon . friend the member for brentford and isleworth has said , do my neighbourhood teams have only one or two officers per ward , rather than the six officers that they had before the conservatives started running them down ? it is not me that is telling the hon . gentleman that crime has reduced ; it is the crime survey of england and wales , endorsed by the office for national statistics . what he is talking about is the perception of crime , which is very important as well . it is important that people feel safe , and that is why we need to do more , but the figures are very clear . if he doubts them , i honestly recommend that he looks at the crime survey statistics , because they actually make for quite comforting reading . the perception of crime is important and there is more to do . the hon . gentleman asked about the deployment of neighbourhood officers . how the record number of officers are deployed is an operational matter for the commissioner , sir mark rowley , and the police and crime commissioner for london , mayor sadiq khan . the hon . gentleman ’s representations would be well directed to them , but london has never in its history had a greater total number of officers . i agree that having them on neighbourhood deployment is valuable . the hon . member for brentford and isleworth said that an extra 20 officers are part of a newly established town centre team . the same is true of croydon , which also has about 20 extra officers , and that is very welcome and useful . in addition to officers , we also need bases from which they can patrol . i am sure that labour members will join me in calling on the mayor of london sadiq khan to ditch his plan , announced in 2017 , to close 37 police stations . i notice that , miraculously and for reasons that i can not imagine , he has just decided to cancel the closure plan for uxbridge police station . let us hope that he cancels the closure plans for the other 36 police stations . let me move on to the importance of prevention . we have talked about police stations , officers and the importance of their being deployed in the neighbourhood , but prevention is important , too . the hon . member for brentford and isleworth referred to the mayor of london ’s violence reduction partnership , and in the next breath she said that the government had been bystanders . what she forgot to mention was that the so - called mayor of london ’s violence reduction partnership is entirely funded by the government . for some reason , she omitted to mention that . i am glad to say that violence reduction units , or partnerships , have received £ 170 million of government funding . they do valuable work in providing diversionary activity . the youth endowment fund , which has £ 200 million over 10 years , identifies the best kinds of intervention and funds them , as well as cognitive behavioural therapy , which helps many young people . we have an antisocial behaviour action plan , which was launched by the prime minister just a couple of months ago and is being rolled out as we speak . it has a number of elements ; i will not detain the house by going through all of them at this late hour , but i will mention a couple . one is hotspot patrolling : antisocial behaviour hotspots are identified , and police officers are “ surged ” into those areas . ten police force areas around the country are conducting pilots during the current financial year . i spoke to the police and crime commissioners about it today , and all the pilots will be up and running this month . from next april , every police force in the country — all 43 of the forces in england and wales — will have hotspot policing , and there will be just over £ 1 million for each police force to fund the asb patrols . that will be welcome , and will address some of the issues that the hon . lady raised . there will also be 10 immediate justice pilots , again funded with about £ 1 million for each force , and starting this month . people who take part in antisocial behaviour will very quickly — ideally within 48 hours — have to undertake restorative work such as removing graffiti or cleaning up a park or a high street , wearing branded hi - vis jackets . once the pilots have been completed this year , every police force in the country , from next april , will have an immediate justice project , again fully funded by the government with £ 1 million for each police force — about £ 43 million in total . we are banning nitrous oxide , which i think will also help on the antisocial behaviour front . i hope members will agree that the antisocial behaviour action plan , of which those measures are just a small part , will help us to clamp down on asb in our communities . the total funding for the plan is about £ 160 million . in the moments remaining to us , let me commend the safer streets fund . the hon . lady mentioned cctv in an alleyway , which may well have ultimately been funded by the fund . london has so far received about £ 3.2 billion . the fund is designed to fund measures such as cctv to help people feel safer on the streets , with particular emphasis on women ’s safety but with the aim of combating asb more widely as well . we will shortly announce the next safer streets funding round . we take vehicle and bicycle theft very seriously — the incidence of both has fallen dramatically , and i think that bicycle theft may have fallen by as much as 65 % since 2010 — and we also take catalytic converter thefts very seriously . we had a spate of those in croydon . i was told by our borough commander that a gang had been arrested a few months ago , and since then we have seen a big reduction , certainly in south london , although i am not sure whether the same is true in west london . we experienced a big drop about six months ago , when that gang was arrested . the scrap metal dealers act 2013 — which began as a private member ’s bill , taken through the house by my constituency predecessor , sir richard ottaway — has helped a great deal . the bill was originally inspired by thefts of lead from church roofs , but it is also making it harder , although sadly not impossible , to sell the rare earth metals to be found in catalytic converters . we are working on that with the national vehicle crime working group . i did ask whether there would be a review of the scrap metal dealers act . it is clearly not working , because we are still experiencing spates of catalytic converter theft . my predecessor ’s private member ’s bill , now the scrap metal dealers act , has dramatically reduced the theft of scrap metal from things like church roofs , which is what inspired his pmb 10 years ago , but we are always happy to look at whether the legislation can be strengthened . broadly , the act deals with metal , but i would be very happy to respond if the hon . lady would like to write to me with specific proposals for how it could be improved or for how regulations could be strengthened . it is welcome that crime has fallen so much since 2010 and that we have record numbers of police officers — more than we have ever had in england and wales , and more than we have ever had in london , too — but we all accept that there is more to do to fight crime . this government are committed to doing that , whether through the safer streets fund , violence reduction units or the asb action plan . when we need to do something , we will do it . i look forward to working with members across the house to keep our constituents safe . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . i am pleased to see those services going into scunthorpe . that underscores the investment we are making now while preparing for the long term , through the largest ever expansion in workforce training in the nhs ’s history . my hon . friend is right about the importance of tie - ins . let me explain why that matters in particular for dentists : around two thirds of dentists do not go on to do nhs work . that is why the plan has looked at tie - ins for dentistry , which we will explore in the weeks and months ahead .