the secretary of state was asked — whether he has had discussions with the northern ireland executive on recent trends in energy costs in northern ireland . although energy costs have come down , they remain too high . our priority is to ensure access to energy is affordable and secure for consumers . that is why this government have established great british energy , which will operate across the whole uk , including northern ireland . the department for energy security and net zero and the northern ireland department for the economy are working together positively on the gb energy bill . it is a pleasure to see the minister in her place and i wish her well ; we have been friends for some time . she will be aware of northern ireland ’s unique energy profile : we are more heavily dependent and reliant on oil than other nations in the united kingdom , with some 68 % of people in northern ireland using oil . was that taken into consideration when the government determined to cut the winter fuel allowance ? what discussions were had with the northern ireland executive in relation to doing so ? i am aware that two thirds of northern ireland ’s homes use oil . the decision to means test winter fuel payments was not a decision the government wished to make , but a result of the conservative ’s £ 22 billion black hole . in northern ireland , the executive have decided that winter fuel payments will continue to be paid to households where someone receives pension credit . i have checked the figures ; in northern ireland it is estimated that over 26,000 people could be eligible for pension credit and the winter fuel payment but are not receiving them . i encourage anyone who is eligible , or knows someone who could be , to check and apply if they can . what steps he is taking with cabinet colleagues to help promote businesses in northern ireland . what steps his department is taking to help grow the northern ireland economy . northern ireland is a great place to live , work and invest . that is something the secretary of state and i have promoted in our over 120 visits and meetings . growth is a key mission of this government , which is why we are supporting uk businesses through securing further investment and through our industrial strategy . the chancellor will set out the steps this government are taking to support growth across the uk on businesses in northern ireland are struggling to operate in a constantly shifting regulatory environment that is deterring investment and decreasing business confidence . it is no wonder that a third of uk businesses want the government to reduce brexit - related barriers , such as customs procedures , according to a recent survey by santander . a starting point would be agricultural trade . will the minister update the house on progress in negotiating a new veterinary and plant health agreement with the european union ? many businesses have secured excellent deals in northern ireland , including ey , which is bringing over 1,000 jobs ; wrightbus , at its bus factory in ballymena ; and hannon pharma link . we are working at pace on a veterinary agreement . we want to reduce checks and the need for checks , doing all that we can to protect the uk ’s internal market . this government have brought in economic stability in place of the economic chaos we saw up until now , and northern ireland businesses will benefit from that . it is all very well talking about an industrial strategy , but economists agree that increasing national insurance contributions for employers reduces profits , reduces pay and leads to fewer jobs . does the minister agree that if the government decide to raise taxes , perhaps to fund union pay rises , then employer national insurance contributions would be the last tax to choose if they want to support northern ireland ’s economy ? it is hard to take lectures from the conservative party on investment and growth . we have had a change election . we will be investing in growth . the hon . member has only a week to wait to listen to what will be happening in the budget . in the meantime , we are going at pace . the international investment summit brought in considerable investment for companies based in northern ireland . we are moving on with our industrial strategy , invest 2035 . we are investing in skills and getting people into work , and transforming our health services . that is essential so that people will want to come to northern ireland because of good health services , and so that they will be well enough to work . all of that is a package for investment in northern ireland . i call the chair of the northern ireland affairs committee . at last week ’s international investment summit , the prime minister and the chancellor announced a total of £ 63 billion of private investment into the uk economy . what steps are the secretary of state and the minister taking to ensure northern ireland is at the forefront of this government ’s effort to stimulate the investment that is needed ? the secretary of state went to the international summit with the first and deputy first ministers and they are all working together on this . the ballymena bus manufacturer , wrightbus , recently signed a deal worth £ 100 billion to supply more than 1,000 buses to go - ahead.[official report , it is good to hear from the minister about the work being done to close the skills gap . can she provide further examples of that work and lay out her intentions for the future ? my hon . friend is right to raise the issue of the skills gap and economic inactivity in northern ireland . i have met wonderful skills providers across northern ireland , such as the rural women ’s network , bolster community , the superstars club , disability action northern ireland , ulster university and the king ’s trust . a wealth of work is being done on good skills support , and we in the uk government want to work with the northern ireland executive to continue to provide support in that area . a reliable , bespoke skills offering is essential to futureproof northern ireland ’s key growth sectors . i call the shadow minister . the minister talks about growth , but the mid south west region growth deal , which was paused by this government , now lies inactive with no direction , and there are reports that much - needed private sector business involvement is now withdrawing . will the minister accept that this government ’s handling and pausing of these growth deals was haphazard ? will she apologise to the people affected and enter urgent direct talks with businesses to get this deal back off the ground ? the secretary of state and i are in constant talks about such deals and with the deal providers . i know the value of these deals not just to the regions affected , but across northern ireland . however , the government face a £ 22 billion black hole , and it is right that the treasury considers all options on the table to address that . we will find out more in the budget next week . the mid south west and the causeway coast and glens growth deals are being considered as part of the spending review , and the government will continue to work closely with the deals ’ partners and the executive . the secretary of state and i will continue to underline the importance of these deals to my ministerial colleagues in the treasury . i call the leader of the democratic unionist party . we look forward to a positive conclusion to those discussions next week . as the minister knows , both representatives from the mid south west region growth deal and the causeway coast and glens growth deal are in westminster today . will the minister acknowledge that , in working with businesses and in trying to encourage greater trade within our own country , the appointment of a chair of intertrade uk was an important first step , but work needs to start , the terms of reference need to be set and businesses need to be able to engage with that body established to support trade within our country ? i agree with the right hon . member that intertrade uk needs to get going with its work to encourage investment between all of the regions and nations of the uk . it is very important to set the terms of reference , and we are working with the organisation as fast as we can now that the chair is in their place i thank the minister for her reply . she will know from discussions with her cabinet colleagues that decisions have been taken to delay the agreement on parcels , to delay the agreement on customs , and to avoid taking the decision on uk - wide labelling . myriad other decisions were also made and supported by this house , including labour members , that are required to be implemented from the “ safeguarding the union ” document . she will know about the interface between trade and constitutional politics , so i urge her to engage with the secretary of state , the paymaster general and others within the cabinet to get on and deliver what businesses and the people of northern ireland need ? we are not the only ministers who came into office three months ago to have faced all sorts of decisions that should have been taken by the previous government . we have taken up those decisions on parcels and on every aspect that the right hon . member mentions . he is right to raise them , because we do need to work on them to ensure that we protect the uk internal market and that we create the best possible regime for business . what assessment he has made with cabinet colleagues of the potential impact of the windsor framework ( non - commercial movement of pet animals ) regulations 2024 on people travelling with pets from great britain to northern ireland . the statutory instrument for the northern ireland pet travel scheme has now been laid . the scheme significantly reduces the requirements associated with the original northern ireland protocol and provides a stable and long - term arrangement for those travelling with their pets within the uk . when the grip of eu law controls even the movement of our pets within the united kingdom , is it not clear that we have gone far too far in regarding northern ireland as eu territory ? for that is the reason for this absurd regulation , which , at the behest of the eu , imposes pet passports if a person wants to bring their pet from gb to northern ireland . there is no point the secretary of state saying that it could have been worse ; they should not exist at all . when will this government get the eu off our backs and liberate the people of northern ireland and our pets from eu diktat ? as i hope the hon . gentleman is aware , northern ireland pet owners will not face any checks and will not be required to hold a pet travel document . in discussing this matter , there is an obligation on him and all of us to ensure that we present the facts , so that people are not unnecessarily troubled . i call the shadow secretary of state . the executive ’s draft programme for government acknowledges that policing numbers in northern ireland are at an all - time low , a situation that chief constable boutcher has described as dangerous . the draft programme commits to increasing numbers in line with new decade , new approach . is the secretary of state convinced that the budget sustainability plan is sufficient to achieve that aim ? order . i am not sure that fits with the question . i was intending to ask a supplementary to question 4 . well , i think we will wait then . let us move on . i call dr lauren sullivan . question 4 , mr speaker . [ laughter . ] whether he has had discussions with the northern ireland executive on the budget sustainability plan . whether he has had discussions with the northern ireland executive on the budget sustainability plan . whether he has had discussions with the northern ireland executive on the budget sustainability plan . where were we , mr speaker ? i welcome the publication of the northern ireland executive ’s budget sustainability plan — a positive and necessary step towards sustainable public finances — and the chief secretary to the treasury has agreed with the northern ireland finance minister that discussions over a long - term fiscal framework for northern ireland can now begin . does the secretary of state agree that to ensure sustainable finances the northern ireland executive need to take steps to reform the nhs and public services ? i share my hon . friend ’s view . as the house will be aware , people in northern ireland face the longest waiting lists in the whole united kingdom , and all governments , including the northern ireland executive , have to balance the money coming in and the funds that they can raise , and take decisions about public service reform . i am very encouraged by the recent event organised by the northern ireland health minister , which dr bengoa , who produced a report on reform in northern ireland , returned to northern ireland to attend , because there is now a commitment to take forward that process . what impact does the secretary of state think that the uk leaving the european convention on human rights would have on the sustainability of northern ireland ’s finances and devolved government ? given that the european convention on human rights is one of the foundations of the good friday agreement , i am frankly astonished that anyone who aspires to lead his majesty ’s opposition should suggest that our country should leave the echr . it would be utterly irresponsible . i commend all those who worked to re - establish devolved government earlier this year at stormont . it is now vital that the northern ireland executive ensure that they have sustainable finances . does the secretary of state agree that revenue raising by the northern ireland executive has an important part to play in delivering financial sustainability and stability to northern ireland ? i do . indeed , raising £ 113 million was part of the deal that the last government put in place as part of the £ 3.3 billion package that led to the restoration — well , that followed the restoration of the executive . that includes delivering a balanced budget in the current year , and i am very encouraged by the statements of the northern ireland finance minister in that regard . the budget sustainability plan is commendable , but does the secretary of state agree that our public services are in crisis ? our roads are crumbling , we have the longest health waiting lists in the whole of the uk , and our schools need investment . northern ireland needs to be in receipt of a fair long - term funding allocation , based on treasury needs . will he confirm to the house that he is making the case for that to the treasury for the people of northern ireland ? northern ireland ’s greater spending needs are recognised . the northern ireland fiscal council was established to answer the question of what that additional funding should be , and it came to the conclusion that the figure should be 124 % , which will be met this year in respect of the budget . the interim fiscal framework also said that if further credible sources come along suggesting that the figure should be different , the government would undertake to look at that . but nothing takes away from the executive ’s responsibility to manage the budget that they have , and to take decisions , including on reform . does the secretary of state agree that the budget resources for the northern ireland justice minister are extremely short and that we are not able to recruit enough police service of northern ireland officers , and has he had any discussions with the justice minister about resolving that problem ? as the hon . member will be aware , decisions about the allocation of the northern ireland budget rest with the northern ireland executive . funds go to the justice minister , who then decides principally how much to pass on to the policing board for policing costs and how much to deal with the justice system and the prisons , which are also under pressure . i recognise the pressure that psni officers face , not least because i met a number of those who were injured in the recent disorder . i call the shadow secretary of state . it is very generous of you to call me again , mr speaker . the executive ’s draft programme for government acknowledges that policing numbers in northern ireland are at an all - time low , a situation that the chief constable has described as dangerous . the draft programme commits to increasing numbers in line with new decade , new approach . is the secretary of state convinced that the budget sustainability plan is sufficient to achieve that aim ? the hon . gentleman raises an important point , as we discussed just a moment ago . i recognise the pressures on the psni , but it falls to the executive to decide how much to allocate , from the funds available to them , to policing and other public services in northern ireland . if they wish to allocate more , they are in a position to do so , but it involves making a choice . the secretary of state is of course right that policing in northern ireland is a devolved matter , but national security is not . if we look at policing numbers right now , which are at an all - time low , we are reminded that his party ’s manifesto made explicit commitments to improving public services in northern ireland . will the government commit to ensuring that policing in northern ireland is sufficient to keep the people of northern ireland safe and maintain national security , and to protecting the additional security funding of £ 32 million a year that comes direct from his majesty ’s treasury ? on the latter point , the hon . gentleman just has to wait a week to see what the budget produces . i simply say to him that the psni , the security services and others do an outstanding job in protecting the people of northern ireland from terrorist threats , and we should all support them in that endeavour . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . the budget sustainability plan highlights that northern ireland has been systemically underfunded , with the fiscal council estimating an annual shortfall of between £ 300 million and £ 400 million since 2022 . meanwhile , the northern ireland executive reported a £ 559 million overspend between 2022 and 2024 . what measures are the government taking to address northern ireland ’s immediate budgetary pressures , ensure long - term financial stability and equitable funding , and , crucially , guarantee sustainable public services ? in addition to the £ 3.3 billion package that followed the restoration of the executive , the executive gained £ 185 million in july when the main estimates were published . in order to avoid having to repay the debt that the hon . member refers to , they have to put their finances on a sustainable path , deliver a balanced budget , and raise the additional £ 130 million revenue to which they committed when the deal was done . the fiscal council ’s view is that 124 % is the right funding . what steps he is taking with cabinet colleagues to remove barriers to trade between northern ireland and great britain . the government are committed to implementing the windsor framework in good faith , and to protecting northern ireland ’s place in the uk internal market . we continue to take forward policies set out in “ safeguarding the union ” , including most recently the establishment of the independent monitoring panel and the publication of guidance under section 46 of the united kingdom internal market act 2020 . there is some concern regarding the supply of medicines to northern ireland . the british generic manufacturers association says that there is an “ absurd situation ” in which there will be shortages due to the bureaucracy of the “ uk only ” labelling required for medicines going into northern ireland . the government say that they are relaxed that the deadline will be met . is the secretary of state relaxed about the continued supply of medicines coming into northern ireland ? it is really important that the medicines that are required continue to be supplied . the industry has had quite a period in which to make arrangements to ensure that the labelling rules are met . i hope that , in the time available , those companies that have not done so will do so . what discussions he has had with cabinet colleagues on implementing the windsor framework labelling requirements set out in his department ’s command paper entitled “ safeguarding the union ” , published on 31 january 2024 . having carefully considered the results of the consultation with industry , the government decided not to proceed with the introduction of mandatory “ not for eu ” labelling in great britian from the result of the northern ireland protocol , signed by the previous government , has been to create an economic border between northern ireland and great britain , and the imposition of eu law , which has created a problem for the supply of goods to northern ireland . when in opposition , labour supported the idea of food labelling as a way of avoiding an interruption in the supply of food goods from gb to northern ireland , so why have the government reneged on that promise , and what will be the trigger for its imposition if needed ? the consultation on uk - wide labelling led the industry to say that such labelling would impose huge costs on industry , and therefore on consumers , through raised goods prices . the aim is to ensure that goods are not delisted in northern ireland . that is why we are taking a power to ensure that if there is any evidence of that happening , the labelling requirements set out in “ safeguarding the union ” can be applied , including on individual products on a sectoral basis . i did not come back to josh newbury after question 5 , so he will ask his supplementary question now . businesses in my constituency tell me that they face increased red tape and costs when importing from or exporting to northern ireland . can the secretary of state confirm that he is committed to unfettered access for goods moving from northern ireland to great britian ? i certainly can confirm that , and it is set out in the united kingdom internal market act 2020 . what discussions he has had with the northern ireland executive on violence against women and girls in northern ireland . i congratulate my hon . friend on her new role as leader of the social democratic and labour party , and i thank her for raising this important issue . seven women and girls have been killed violently in northern ireland this year alone . that is devastating . i have discussed the importance of action on violence against women and girls with the first minister and the deputy first minister , and i welcome the northern ireland executive making it a priority in their programme for government , as well as the new strategic framework . mary ward in my constituency became the fourth woman to be murdered in just six weeks in northern ireland . it remains one of the most dangerous places in europe to be a woman , with a femicide rate twice that of britain . we need to think deeply about the type of society that we have created , and that is manifesting in this way . the recent publication of the northern ireland strategy on violence against women was overdue and very welcome . does the minister agree that the funding and human resources attached to that strategy must be proportionate to the urgency and the deep roots of the issue ? will she support the executive as they review the sentencing and judicial processes that are contributing to these very preventable deaths ? my thoughts are with the family and friends , and all those affected by the murder of mary ward . every woman deserves to feel safe . there is what has been called an epidemic of violence against women and girls in northern ireland . i join my hon . friend in welcoming the new strategy . we need stronger action by the justice system and more support for frontline services in order to tackle harassment wherever it is — in homes , schools , workplaces , and on our streets . we need to challenge and change misogynistic attitudes and behaviours . that will need urgent action , and us working together , and this government stand ready to do that . whether he has had discussions with the police service of northern ireland on its use of surveillance powers . i meet regularly with the chief constable and his team to discuss a range of issues . while the chief constable has operational independence , the investigatory powers commissioner ’s office provides oversight of those powers to ensure that their use is necessary , proportionate and in accordance with the law . at a recent hearing of the investigatory powers tribunal , it became apparent that the northern ireland police force had been caught surveilling journalists ’ telephones on the basis that they had received secret documents from whistleblowers . the reason for the secrecy of those documents was to cover up the embarrassment of the royal ulster constabulary about its handling of the loughinisland massacre . will the secretary of state meet me to discuss the future use of surveillance powers by the northern ireland police ? i am indeed aware of the background to this case . the original search warrants were quashed and the police investigation was discontinued . as the right hon . gentleman knows , the investigatory powers tribunal is currently looking at this case , and it would not be appropriate for me to comment while that is ongoing . the chief constable has set up the mccullough review to look at the wider issue , and the right hon . gentleman may well wish to make representations to that review . the prime minister was asked — if he will list his official engagements for wednesday 23 october . i have been asked to reply , as my right hon . and learned friend the prime minister is in samoa to discuss shared opportunities in the commonwealth , including how we work together to deliver economic growth . with increasing threats facing britain , it is vital that we also strengthen defence , security and co - operation with our allies . that is why today , this government signed a landmark defence agreement with germany that will help keep us safe and create hundreds of jobs . i know the whole house will join me in sending our best wishes to sir chris hoy and his wife sarra . he is a true sporting legend , and the courage and positivity they have shown will inspire many others . i also send our condolences to those affected by the train crash in powys . this morning , i have had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others . in addition to my duties in this house , i shall have further such meetings later today . for 14 years , my constituents in newcastle - under - lyme had to suffer flatlining wages , in - work poverty , and a bust economy that served nobody . can i urge the deputy prime minister to use the employment rights bill to turn the page on the last 14 years , give our businesses the support they need , and finally restore dignity , prosperity and opportunity to the good people of newcastle - under - lyme ? i thank my hon . friend for his question and welcome him to his place . when this government took office , we promised the biggest upgrade to workers ’ rights in a generation — a new deal for working people . we said that we would introduce a bill within the first 100 days , and we have kept that promise . this is a labour government led by working people for working people . i call the deputy leader of the opposition . i join the deputy prime minister in paying tribute to the bravery of sir chris hoy — he truly is an inspiration to us all . i also echo her comments about the train crash in powys . what is the deputy prime minister ’s definition of working people ? let me start by welcoming the right hon . gentleman to his new place . today is our first exchange since he pushed for a july general election , and if his own side has not offered him a peerage , i certainly would have . the definition of “ working people ” is the people who the tory party have failed for the past 14 years . the deputy prime minister stood on a manifesto promising not to raise taxes on working people . it now appears that she can not even define who working people are , so i will give her another go . there are 5 million small business owners in this country ; are they working people ? i do not know how the shadow deputy prime minister can stand there with a straight face when it was the small businesses — the working people of this country — that paid the price of the conservatives crashing the economy , sending interest rates soaring . i think he needs to learn his own lessons in opposition . i think the whole house will have heard the deputy prime minister disregard 5 million hard - working small business owners . these are the publicans , the shopkeepers , the family running a local café . none of those count as working people to her . labour gave a clear commitment not to raise national insurance . the independent institute for fiscal studies has given its view on this . it says that raising employer national insurance is “ a tax … on working people . ” even the chancellor said that raising employer national insurance was a “ jobs tax ” that will “ make each new recruit more expensive and increase the costs to business ” . so does the deputy prime minister agree with the ifs and her own chancellor ? i remember what the conservatives said to business . what was it ? “ eff business ” , whereas this party held an international investment summit last week , which put about £ 63 billion into our economy . we are pro - business , pro - worker and getting on with fixing the mess that they left behind . i think we can take it from that answer that the deputy prime minister does not agree with the ifs , and i suppose it should not come as a surprise that she does not agree with her chancellor , but does she agree with this : “ working people will pay … when employers pass on the hike in national insurance ” ? those are her words , so does she at least agree with herself ? what i am incredibly proud of is that this week , this government brought in a new employment bill that will raise the living standards of 10 million workers . would the shadow deputy prime minister like to apologise for the hike in taxes — they are at a 70 - year high — that he put on working people , the crashing of the economy and the disaster that he left behind ? the deputy prime minister mentions her policy . let us be clear : it is a £ 5 billion hit to the british economy , and that is her own assessment . following these answers , there will be millions of working people even more worried about the tax rises coming their way in next week ’s budget . however , as this is our last exchange across the dispatch box , i would like to turn to somebody i hope we can all agree is a hard - working person — his majesty the king . will the deputy prime minister join me in sending him best wishes ahead of the commonwealth summit in samoa ? in particular , will she confirm that this government recognise the unique role played by the commonwealth , and will she commit to deepening that relationship , so that , under his majesty ’s leadership , we build upon possibly the greatest legacy of the late queen ? i will miss our exchanges — the battle of the gingers , the late nights voting — and in that spirit , i will agree with my right hon . friend . the king does a tremendous job , and so did the late queen . the commonwealth is very important , and that is why the king and the prime minister are working together at the moment . i thank the right hon . lady for that answer . our commonwealth family is brought together by historical and cultural ties — indeed , much like the pair of us . [ interruption . ] i will resist the temptation to replicate that . as we look to the commonwealth ’s future , we have the opportunity to deepen our economic relationship . will she assure the house that the prime minister will use the summit to continue the work , begun by the last government , of building deeper economic ties with our commonwealth friends and allies ? we talk about economics ; the architect of the 2024 tory general election campaign is doing his victory lap before retiring with the hereditary peers that he fought so hard to protect . he leaves behind a tory party in utter denial — heads in the sand , refusing to accept their rejection by the british public . their plan for britain includes scrapping the minimum wage , cutting maternity pay and tax breaks for the big oil companies . this labour government were elected—[interruption . ] order . dr evans , you have got a sore neck ; i wish a little that it was your throat . tory members do not like to hear it , but this labour government were elected to end the tory chaos , and that is exactly what we are doing , with £ 600 more in the pockets of insecure workers , 30,000 new dads given paternity leave and 10 million working people better off . while their so - called leadership candidates argue about what went wrong , this labour government are getting on with rebuilding britain . i , like many mps , have heard many heart - rending stories of constituents who have had poor end - of - life support . had palliative care been available alongside an end - of - life plan , their experiences could have been so different . will the deputy prime minister agree to set up a commission for palliative and end - of - life care , so that everyone can access the very best support when terminally ill and have a peaceful and dignified death , and will she meet to discuss that ? i thank my hon . friend for raising what is an emotive subject for members on both sides of the house . from my work in this area before i was in this place , i know what incredible work this is , and what an honour it is to be there for somebody at the end of their life . discussions have begun on how to improve access to palliative and end - of - life care , and i will ensure that my hon . friend gets a meeting with the relevant minister to discuss this issue . i call the deputy leader of the liberal democrats . may i associate myself and the liberal democrats with the deputy prime minister ’s remarks about chris hoy , and about all those involved in the train crash ? our nhs is bracing itself for a winter crisis . one of the causes of the winter crisis every year is that there are thousands of people in hospitals who are fit to go home , but who can not be discharged because there are not the care workers in place to enable people to recover at home or in a care home . will the deputy prime minister consider the liberal democrats ’ idea of an nhs winter taskforce to winter - proof our nhs , end the cycle of the winter crisis , and put to an end the scandal of hospital patients paying the price of the social care crisis left by the conservatives ? i thank the hon . lady for her comments , and i share her desire to ensure that care workers are given the respect and importance that they deserve . they are critical to solving the problems in our national health service . the labour party will create a national care service , and we are launching our first ever fair pay agreement for care professionals to boost recruitment and retention . we must get the nhs back on its feet after the disaster of the conservatives , and my right hon . friend the chancellor will have more to say on that in the budget . i thank the deputy prime minister for her answer . we stand ready , as a party of constructive opposition , to work with the government to fix our social care system . however , a measure that could make it harder for us to keep the carers that we so desperately need would be an increase in employers ’ national insurance contributions . were that measure to go ahead , it would affect millions of small businesses , including 18,000 small care providers . will the deputy prime minister assure the house that nothing in the budget will make it harder for vulnerable people to access the care workers and the care that they desperately need ? again , i will not speculate on the budget , not least with the chancellor sat beside me . to reiterate what the chancellor and the prime minister have said , this budget will recognise that working people of this country and enterprise in this country have been hard - hit by 14 years of the conservatives . we will rebuild britain , and we will grow our economy to pay for our public services . next year marks the 200th anniversary of the stockton to darlington railway , but the rail industry in my area is in peril . hundreds of jobs are at risk at hitachi rail as a consequence of a lack of action from the previous government . will the deputy prime minister join me and our hon . friend the member for newton aycliffe and spennymoor ( alan strickland ) , along with workers , management and trade unions , in ensuring that no stone is left unturned as we fight for the future of the hitachi rail factory ? i welcome my hon . friend to his place . he has been a champion for workers at newton aycliffe from day one . i know he has met the transport secretary , and i can assure him that we are in close contact with hitachi on operations to secure a sustainable future for newton aycliffe . we are committed to a long - term industrial strategy for rolling stock , seeking to support british manufacturing and end the volatility of recent years . in the spirit of today ’s cross - party working , will the deputy prime minister join me in applauding the brave labour staff members who travelled across the atlantic to campaign against donald trump ? i am loving this love - in ; i do not often get it . what i will say to the right hon . gentleman is that people in their own time often go and campaign , and that is what we have seen . it happens in all political parties — people go and campaign , and they do what they want to do in their own time with their own money . like many in my constituency of cowdenbeath and kirkcaldy , my family knows what it means to raise and support a disabled child . charities such as the yard in kirkcaldy do an amazing job providing vital additional help for disabled children and their families . last month , a survey found that our country is so broken that three quarters of parents of children with special educational needs and disabilities have been forced to give up work or cut their hours . does the deputy prime minister agree that our labour government must tackle this intolerable reality ? i absolutely agree with my hon . friend , and i pay tribute to those who work with children with special educational needs and disabilities . i myself have my amazing son , who does tremendously well given the challenges he has faced in life . i know from personal experience that the system is just not working for children and families . future funding decisions will need to be taken as part of the upcoming spending review , but we will work with the sector to deliver our shared mission and restore parents ’ trust . just three months into this labour government , we have seen brutal cuts to support for pensioners and the taxing of education , and just this week we have seen £ 5 billion of additional pressure put on british businesses . why do this government have such a problem with aspiration ? the hon . member might not have been in this place — i welcome him to his place now — in the last parliament , but it was his government who left the £ 22 billion black hole , his government who left us with the biggest housing crisis , his government who crashed the economy and his government who saw inflation go to 11 % , where pensioners were worse off than they are now . i watched in horror and condemned the act of 7 october by the terrorist group hamas . a year later , i watch in horror as 42,000 people are killed in gaza , 11,000 of them children . people have been burned alive attached to drips , aid workers have been killed and now families are starving . our right hon . friend the prime minister has said that the world will not stand by and see the lack of humanitarian assistance . if the israeli government will not listen to our prime minister ’s words , what tangible , measurable actions will we take as the uk government ? i thank my hon . friend for raising this serious and important issue . the humanitarian situation in northern gaza is dire . we need an immediate ceasefire , much more aid allowed to flow in and an immediate release of all the hostages . we have suspended uk export licences to israel for items that might be used in the current conflict . the government have concluded that there is a clear risk that items exported to israel might be used in serious violations of international humanitarian law in gaza . that does not change our position of steadfast support for israel ’s security , but we will always do so in a manner consistent with our obligations under domestic and international law . our child protection services have had to deal with a number of cases where parents and carers have argued that their fatal actions were lawful punishment . will the deputy prime minister bring forward legislation bringing the rest of our country into line with scotland and wales , so that all children enjoy unambiguous protection in law against violence ? the hon . gentleman raises a very important point . i will ensure that the minister has a meeting with him . the first job of any government is to protect their citizens and that includes our children . we will make sure we work across the house to deliver that . last friday was international menopause day and the government announced mariella frostrup as the new menopause employment ambassador . mariella will be working across whitehall to ensure every department recognises the need to support women through their menopausal years . hopefully , the deputy prime minister will join me in celebrating that appointment , and confirm that this government will do all they can to keep menopausal women happy , healthy and wonderful . absolutely , and i thank my hon . friend for all her work in this area . this government will boost protections for women experiencing menopause symptoms at work and i am proud that we have appointed mariella frostrup as the new menopause employment ambassador . she is a powerful champion who will work with employers across the country to raise awareness and improve workplace support for women , and help them to stay in work and progress in their careers . charlie from my constituency is an eight - year - old boy with an autism diagnosis who has been out of school for almost a year . he is one of 1,800 children in surrey missing school because of a lack of appropriate special educational needs provision . will the government commit to ending this scandal by properly funding special educational needs provision in next week ’s budget , so that children like charlie , in my constituency of esher and walton and beyond , are no longer let down ? i thank the hon . member for her very important question . i am sorry to hear about what charlie and many other children with special educational needs have gone through . we inherited a really dire situation and many members across the house have raised this issue . i am sure the chancellor has heard what she has said about the upcoming budget . this morning we woke to more tragic news of deaths in the channel , something we are hearing far too often . just last month , we saw the death of a pregnant woman and children — children , mr speaker . what are the government doing to take on the evil smuggling gangs who are trading in human misery ? i thank my hon . friend and welcome him , and his expertise in the national crime agency , to this place . he knows that we inherited an asylum system in chaos . as he rightly says , these are people — women and children . we are putting in place a credible plan to protect our borders and remove those with no right to be here by setting up our border security command , backed by £ 75 million of investment . we are working with our international partners to target and disrupt the criminal smuggling gangs . i call the father of the house . will the government please continue to work closely with me and west lindsey district council to ensure that raf scampton is sold off in a timely fashion at a fair price , so that we secure the future of the runway , the spaceport and the heritage centre , rather than maximise value and cover it with housing ? i thank the right hon . gentleman , the father of the house , for his question . my right hon . friend the home secretary is taking urgent action to clear the backlog of cases and reduce the use of asylum accommodation , saving millions for taxpayers . i will ensure that he is kept fully updated as the scampton decommissioning and disposal process is followed . in my constituency , hundreds of leaseholders , tenants and shared owners are living in properties with cladding and other defects . around the country , there are thousands . their lives are on hold . many are facing bankruptcy and delaying having children , unable to move . we have had another change in ministerial responsibility . will the deputy prime minister take a personal lead on keeping on top of this issue , as years since grenfell people are still living in limbo and need some hope of change ? i thank my hon . friend for her important question . let me say from the outset that the pace of remediation has been too slow . i do take a personal lead : seven years on from the grenfell tower tragedy , it is unacceptable that so many buildings still have unsafe cladding . i am meeting developers , mayors , regulators and national building safety bodies to press the urgency of this work , and i will ensure that action is being taken to make homes safe . shropshire ’s farmers have been suffering from flooding following 18 months of incredibly wet weather , topped off last wednesday by a month ’s worth of rain in 24 hours . they were not eligible for the farming recovery fund , and a freedom of information request by found that only £ 2.1 million of that £ 50 million has been handed out to farmers . will the government consider extending the eligibility of that scheme so that we can keep farmers going when they are deluged by floodwater ? i am really sorry to hear the plight of shropshire farmers . we inherited the flood defence programme in disrepair , and thanks to 14 years of mismanagement and failure , communities are unprotected and families and businesses are forced to pay the price . we launched a flood defence taskforce to turbocharge the delivery and co - ordination of flood defences , and we are investing £ 1.5 billion this year to scale up flooding national resilience . i will ensure that the hon . lady gets a meeting with the minister.[official report , the government have delivered on their manifesto commitment to introduce the employment rights bill . it includes a historic fair pay agreement for care workers , which will benefit all those who care for older and disabled adults such as those in my constituency . does the deputy prime minister agree that care workers deserve pay and conditions that match the amazing work they do to support our loved ones to have a fulfilling life ? i welcome my hon . friend to her place . as a biased former care worker , i will always champion carers and the complex quality and professional work that they do . i absolutely agree that care workers deserve the pay and conditions to match their enormous contribution to our community . i am proud to say that we are delivering that fair pay agreement that will give carers the recognition that they deserve , and i will ensure that those carers are able to deliver the best possible care to our loved ones . last month , a widely reported study from aston business school showed that uk goods exports to the eu are 27 % down , and imports are 32 % lower than they would otherwise have been , thanks to the conservatives ’ failed brexit deal . will the deputy prime minister tell me what steps the government are taking as part of their reset with the eu to cut brexit red tape for small businesses , to help our economy get growing again ? i welcome the hon . member to his place . he is right to advocate for small businesses , which are the backbone of our economy . this government are turning the page on the relationship with europe , reinvigorating alliances and forging new partnerships rather than reopening the divisions of the past . we will improve the uk ’s trade and investment relationship with the eu , tearing down unnecessary barriers to trade . that will not involve rejoining the single market and customs union or introducing freedom of movement , but we will make that relationship better . some 27,000 people in the cities of london and westminster live in the private rented sector . after 14 years of neglect and delay , they face damp and mould in their homes , and risk no - fault evictions and out - of - the - blue rent hikes . does the deputy prime minister agree that the renters ’ rights bill currently in committee will transform the lives of private renters and finally rebalance power between tenants and landlords ? i welcome my hon . friend to her place . i am incredibly proud of the renters ’ rights bill that we are pushing through parliament , because too many renters are being exploited by a minority of unscrupulous landlords , unable to challenge bad practices because they could be evicted at any moment . [ interruption . ] opposition members chunter , but they promised the electorate that and failed to deliver . we will deliver . communities across the country , including in bedfordshire , recently experienced widespread flooding . the village of maulden in my constituency has experienced an increase in flooding following cumulative housing development . as the deputy prime minister requires communities across the country to build more homes , will she also ensure that those new developments do not increase the flooding risk ? i welcome the hon . member to his place . we recognise the devastating impact that flooding can have . i know that the flooding minister visited bedfordshire in september to meet volunteers and residents . we inherited flood defences in disrepair and behind schedule . we have launched the floods resilience taskforce , and when it comes to the planning reforms needed to deliver the 1.5 million homes this country needs , we will ensure that the right infrastructure is in place and that communities are resilient . zoe ’s place , in the west derby area of liverpool , is a hospice that provides support to sick children and their families . it has been threatened with closure and has to find £ 5 million by the end of the year . does the deputy prime minister agree that such hospices need to be on a statutory footing and not reliant on charitable funding ? the hospice situation in this country has faced significant challenges because of the 14 years of devastation under the conservatives . the health secretary has already raised these issues and knows that this is of importance ; i will make sure that my hon . friend gets to meet him . the deputy prime minister will know that my constituency , and lincolnshire as a whole , is the breadbasket of britain , producing 12 % of the food consumed across the entire nation , including 30 % of the vegetables and 20 % of the sugar beet . that is because of the grade 1 and 2 land in lincolnshire , yet lincolnshire faces an invasion of giant pylons down the east coast and huge solar developments . will she meet a delegation of colleagues from lincolnshire and nearby , including my right hon . friend i thank the right hon . member for his question . he knows that we launched a consultation on the national planning policy framework . we will protect agricultural land , we will ensure that we have renewable energy so we have energy security in this country , and we will get britain building again . with permission , mr speaker , i would like to update the house on the action that this government are taking to fundamentally transform our water industry and clean up our waterways for good . fourteen years of conservative failure have left our water sector in disrepair . the rivers , lakes and seas that we all love have record levels of pollution . severe droughts are set to leave parts of the country facing significant water shortages by 2050 , particularly in the south - east , and water companies forecast that england will need to find an extra 5 billion litres of water a day to fill the gap between supply and demand by that same year . a rising population and the increasing impacts of climate change are putting strain on the water system . firmer action should have been taken by the previous government to ensure that money was invested to fix the water and sewerage system . instead , they allowed that money to be siphoned off for bonuses while our water infrastructure crumbled . a secure water supply is essential for every home and business throughout the country . it is the foundation of our economy , our communities and our global security . it is essential to life itself . we use water to cool power stations , and it is vital to our electricity supply . we use water to grow the crops that provide the food on our plate , and we use it to supply our leisure industries . without a resilient water supply , we can not build the new homes and critical infrastructure that we need to grow the economy . concerns about pollution , water shortages , bill increases and the sector ’s financial resilience all point to the need for profound change . the water sector needs a complete reset , with a reformed water sector working in partnership with government to bring in the investment we need . we need a clear long - term plan to ensure that the sector puts customers and the environment first and can attract investment to upgrade our infrastructure . we need a water system fit for the future . we can not clean up our rivers , lakes and seas overnight , but we have a plan , and the work of change has started . on together with the welsh government , we are launching an independent commission that will lead the biggest review of the water industry since privatisation 35 years ago . the commission will ensure that we have the robust regulatory framework that we need to attract the significant investment that is required to clean up our waterways , build new infrastructure to address water scarcity , and restore public confidence in the sector . i am delighted that it will be led by the former deputy governor of the bank of england , sir jon cunliffe , who has decades of economic and regulatory experience . sir jon will be supported by an advisory group of experts covering areas such as the environment , public health , engineering , customers , investors and economics . he will seek advice from wider groups of stakeholders including environmental campaigners , consumer champions , water companies , regulators and the public at large . the commission will conduct a root - and - branch review of the water sector ’s regulatory system . it will cover the water industry in england and wales and the strategic planning framework under the water framework directive and river basin management plans to ensure that strategic water planning across sectors is effective at catchment , regional and national scales . where housing , planning , agriculture and drainage interlink with strategic planning across the water system , they are also in scope . the commission will set a new framework for the future . it will not make recommendations that affect the current price review ’ 24 process , in order to ensure that there is a stable climate for investment as that process concludes . it will be pragmatic and will focus on reforms that improve the privatised regulatory model . nationalisation of the water sector will not be in scope , because of the high costs of buying out the current owners , lack of evidence that it would lead to improvements , and the long delays that it would cause in the process of cleaning up polluted water and serving customers better . the commission will make recommendations in the first half of 2025 , reporting to me as environment secretary and to the deputy first minister and cabinet secretary for climate change and rural affairs in wales . once it has made its recommendations , the uk and welsh governments will respond and consult on proposals , including subsequent legislation . further details of the commission ’s scope , delivery , approach and timelines are set out in its terms of reference , which will be available on gov.uk today . this government will deliver an ambitious , long - term and collaborative approach to reforming the water sector , creating a strong new partnership between government , water companies , customers , investors and all those who work to protect our precious environment . the commission will set the groundwork for the reformed water sector that we want to see . i thank sir jon for leading this important work . this is our opportunity to ensure that our children , and their children , have the chance to create memories that will last a lifetime — to splash about at the seaside , row on our rivers or enjoy a picnic on the lake shore . this is our opportunity to inject billions of pounds into the economy and to power uk growth by attracting global investment into a transformed water sector . this is our opportunity to clean up our water once and for all . i call the shadow minister . i thank the secretary of state for prior sight of his statement . fourteen years in opposition — and this is what the labour party has to offer . labour members have had more than a decade to craft a clear package of policies , listen to campaigners and prepare to govern , yet what they have brought to the house today illustrates no sign of any ambition . this is a sign of hesitation . it is a way to delay the difficult decisions and buy themselves more time . it is part of a growing trend that unfortunately we are seeing consistently from this new labour government , across all departments : announce a review , a taskforce and yet another commission , and hope the public do not notice that really they never had much of a plan at all . that approach is simply not going to wash with the bill payers . before the election , the secretary of state toured the country with campaigners like feargal sharkey , promising radical change to the sector . he is now in power , and what has he actually achieved so far ? he spent the entire election campaign telling voters that he wanted to put water company bosses in the dock , but we can see from the government ’s announcements on the water ( special measures ) bill that it will achieve no such thing , as campaigners and industry experts have already pointed out . nor will the bill provide any reassurance whatever for investors . rather marvellously , the secretary of state has managed not only to frustrate campaigners , but to disenfranchise investors from any long - term aspirations to invest in the sector . the secretary of state says that he has announced a ban on water company bonuses . hang on : that was a policy that we brought forward in our time in government and that the secretary of state is now attempting to reannounce and pass off as his own . it was the conservatives who announced a ban on water company bosses ’ bonuses , linked shareholder dividends to environmental performance , quadrupled water company inspections , fast - tracked investments to cut spills and launched a whistleblowing portal for water company workers to report breaches . it is surprising to hear the secretary of state claim that his government are truly serious about this issue , when their proposals are less firm than the measures delivered by the previous government . he could take real action right now by progressing the last conservative administration ’s plans for an automatic ban on water company bosses ’ bonuses when offences take place . rehashing announcements already set in motion by the conservative government , putting forward policies that will not actually put more pressure on water company bosses and then simply pressing pause on a year - long review will not result in the widespread change that labour promised its voters . the secretary of state acknowledges that the announced review will make no recommendations that affect the current price review ’ 24 process , meaning that there will be no chance of the government considering making any significant change until 2029 at the earliest . will he provide an outline of the timeframe associated with actual recommendations from the review being implemented and put in place ? when is any real benefit from this further review , taskforce or commission likely to be experienced , not only for the water industry , in terms of infrastructure improvements , but for the bill payer and the environment ? it seems to me that the secretary of state is just kicking the can down the road with another review , another taskforce and another commission , and removing himself from any of the tough decisions . the secretary of state said that the review would have no impact on the price review ’ 24 process . will he outline exactly when the positive impacts will come ? by my calculations , it will not be until 2029 at the earliest . will he also outline the impact of the review on the measures proposed in the water ( special measures ) bill ? what will be done if the recommendations do not sit comfortably with the current proposals ? one can not help concluding that the secretary of state is out of depth on this issue , can not deliver on the tough language that he promised in the run - up to the general election and is now doing nothing more than attempting to kick the tough decisions down the road and into the long grass . this secretary of state seems to be all bark and no bite . well , that was all a little bit embarrassing , was n’t it ? the previous government had 14 years in power , our rivers , lakes and seas are awash with record levels of pollution , and that is all the conservatives have to say . i took action seven days after the general election : i brought the water chief execs into my office , and we agreed that money earmarked for investment will be ringfenced so that it can not be diverted to pay multimillion - pound bonuses to water chief execs who oversee failure in the water sector , as happened on the shadow minister ’s watch . the commission will reset the sector that the conservatives broke , and clean up the water that they polluted . it will report to the government in june and inform subsequent legislation . at the weekend , i went swimming in the north sea — probably for the last time this year — having first checked on the surfers against sewage website that there had not been any legal or illegal spills . it is disgraceful that the last conservative government left our seas and waterways in such as state , and it is notable that water uk continuously blames the regulator for not allowing it to raise prices in order to invest further in our system . will the secretary of state make sure that we assess the value extracted by the water companies ? they have taken billions of pounds in profits and hundreds of millions in bonuses . we need to make sure that future investment adds value and does not take it away . i thank my hon . friend for her comments . unfortunately , customers have been left to pay the price of 14 years of conservative failure to secure investment in our water infrastructure , so it has collapsed to such an extent that ofwat now recommends eye - watering bill increases . every penny of that is down to the failure of the conservative party . our reset will ensure that that kind of catastrophic failure can never happen again . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . i am grateful to the secretary of state for advance sight of his statement . to a large degree , i welcome it — or at least the intention behind it — but water companies dumped 54 % more sewage into our lakes , rivers and coastal areas in 2023 than in the previous year . that amounts to 464,000 spills , including many in the lakes and rivers of westmorland . my constituency is the most beautiful part of england and also the wettest , so water is deeply personal to us . does the secretary of state understand my worry that we might have gone from having a conservative government who would not face up to this outrage or tackle it , to having a new labour administration who have acknowledged this outrage and decisively resolved to have a jolly good think about it ? while thames water crumbles as we speak and water companies seek bill increases of 40 % , despite such poor performance across the country , does he really think that having a commission is necessary , given the urgent need for action ? we have a fragmented , under - resourced and under - powered regulatory system , which allows powerful water companies to play regulators off against each other while our constituents pay the price . is the solution not obvious ? as the liberal democrats propose , we should create a new , unified and far more powerful clean water authority . does the secretary of state share my deep concern that the current regulator has to give 25 years ’ notice in order to strip a water company of its licence for environmental failure ? will he ensure that this ludicrous protection for failing companies should be replaced by a six - month period of notice instead ? we are already more than 5 % of the way through this parliament , and this issue is one of our constituents ’ most pressing concerns . do we have to drag our heels like this ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his comments . he is absolutely right to point out that last year we saw the highest levels of sewage ever recorded in our rivers , lakes and seas . no wonder the public are so angry , including in his constituency . tragically , lake windermere , an iconic and beautiful site , has been polluted with sewage and agricultural run - off because of the failures of the previous government . i have taken action already . we had a reset moment just seven days after the general election , when we carried out within a week things that the conservatives failed to do in 14 years in power . the water ( special measures ) bill is going through the houses of parliament right now to ban the payment of unfair bonuses to water bosses . the commission , led by sir jon cunliffe , will look at the entire sector — root and branch — including governance and regulation , which the hon . gentleman points to . it will look specifically at the point that he has raised , so that we end up with a system of regulation that is fit to clean up our waterways and then to protect them for the decades to come . i thank the secretary of state for his statement and his announcement of this important review . to have sir jon cunliffe , a long - term public servant , running it is very welcome indeed . will my right hon . friend say a bit more about how the close working between the welsh government and the uk government will work , because that will be important in determining how this announcement affects my constituents ? my hon . friend alludes to an important point . rivers and water catchments are no respecters of boundaries , and it is important that we have a model that works within catchments , including where they cross boundaries , as they do in some cases between england and wales . the review has been jointly commissioned by the uk and welsh governments , and it will jointly report to both governments . it will seek a better model for structuring and supporting our water sector , so that we can ensure that we clean up all our rivers , all our lakes and all our seas ; so that the public can get back to enjoying them ; and so that we can bring in the investment to support the infrastructure , which will be delivered at pace , to drive economic growth in every single part of the united kingdom . we come to the chair of the select committee . the secretary of state is quite right to point to the role of the payment of bonuses and dividends in bringing us to this point , but he must surely acknowledge that that is far from being the whole story . there are a number of business and accounting practices in companies such as thames water that have brought us to the stage we are at today . if he is serious about having a water system that is fit for the future , he has to understand properly what has gone on before . will he therefore confirm that the commission will be properly resourced with the necessary forensic accounting resource , so that those who have been responsible for the most egregious practices in the past and who now seem to be appearing in other water companies around the country will not be allowed to do the same thing there ? i thank the chair of the select committee for the points that he makes . of course , he is right . the water ( special measures ) bill , with its ban on bonuses , will not be sufficient to reset the sector , although it is an ask that the public are rightly making because of the unfairness of people who are overseeing failure being richly rewarded for that failure . that should not have been allowed to go on under the previous government , and it will not go on under this new government . the reason we have set up the commission is to address the very points the right hon . gentleman makes about financial and environmental sustainability and viability . i look forward to working with him and his committee as the commission carries out its work , as we review its findings in the summer of next year , and as we then shape what will be significant new legislation to reset the sector — a reformed sector — in a new partnership with government to bring in the investment that will finally clean up our waterways . i declare an interest as a customer of southern water who lost my water supply for five days earlier this year , as did 30,000 of my constituents . as the secretary of state knows well from his visits to hastings and to rye , we have major issues from flooding to sewage to water outages . i welcome the water commission . how can my constituents , particularly volunteer groups such as the clean water action group , have their voices heard , particularly their concerns about ensuring that the regulators have the power and resources to clean up our sea ? my hon . friend is a powerful campaigner for cleaner water . in fact , it is hard to think of anybody who has campaigned harder on the issue . the commission will seek to engage the public at large , as well as a wider group of stakeholders who will be represented on an advisory group , which will include a customer voice . once the commission has reported , the government will consult on those findings and that will inform the subsequent legislation that will reset this sector once and for all . order . i say gently to the secretary of state that i am here and he should be speaking through the chair , not to the member , as he has done for the last two questions . we can work together to get everybody looking the right way . i call sir gavin williamson to set a good example . in my constituency we have beautiful rivers , including the great and mighty river trent and the river penk . over the last few years , as more transparent data has become available , we have been able to see the number of sewage discharges going into those rivers . will the secretary of state promise the house that looking at how we can reduce sewage discharges into the trent and the penk will be at the heart of what the commission does ? it is always a pleasure , of course , to gaze at you , mr speaker , rather than elsewhere in the chamber . the right hon . gentleman makes an important point . the point of the commission is to identify ways in which we can strengthen regulation and operations so that we can bring in the investment , clean up our water sector once and for all , and reduce and remove the pollution that is destroying so many beautiful rivers , including those in his constituency . i congratulate the secretary of state on the commission that has been set up today — it is absolutely fantastic . gower was the first area of outstanding natural beauty in the whole of the united kingdom , and the bathing waters there are second to none , but some of them are less so . i would like to highlight a campaign i have set up to test the bathing water in the winter season , with my constituents , local business and the gower society , because data is key — it is what will drive the improvement of our bathing water . will he congratulate surfers against sewage , which has been really supportive , and everybody in my constituency who is taking part and taking control ? my hon . friend represents an incredibly beautiful part of the country in the gower , and her constituents and the many people who visit those beauty spots will want to know that their children can enjoy the water without risk of contamination from polluted water . of course i congratulate surfers against sewage and the many campaigners who have pushed for reform . they will be invited to participate in the work of the commission — they have huge expertise . i hope that , before long , her constituents who are testing the quality of the water will start to see improvements until it is pure and crystal clear , as it should always have been . the secretary of state highlights the scandal of sewage in our seas and rivers . indeed , raw sewage was dumped into our rivers and seas for 3.6 million hours last year . since privatisation , £ 72 billion has been paid to shareholders in dividends , while his department highlights that it would cost £ 56 billion to carry out the necessary investment , so privatisation has failed as a model for getting the investments in place . will he therefore confirm that the commission will look at what ownership model for water will be effective in addressing this scandal , including the option of bringing water back into public hands ? the reason i have ruled out nationalisation is that it would not resolve the problems we face . we saw in the olympics in france that the river seine was not able to be used for swimming because of pollution . that is a state - owned water system . we see the problems in scotland . that is a state - owned water system as well . the problems are those of governance and regulation . nationalisation would cost towards £ 100 billion of public money — money that does not exist — and the time it would take to unpick the current models of ownership , during which time investment would be choked off , would see our rivers , lakes and seas filled with even more sewage and pollution , rather than less . i am more interested in the purity of our water than the purity of our ideology . i will do what works best as quickly as possible . the commission will give us guidance on how we should change the system to make sure it works for everybody . for the last few weeks , i have been conducting independent tests , with colleagues from bournemouth university , for nitrates and bacteria in the lovely poole harbour and the surrounding waters . i have noticed , from talking to colleagues , that the frequency of official testing and the number of sites at which those tests are carried out have been reduced significantly by the environment agency over the years . will the commission look at those issues ? will testing and the frequency of testing be included in its work ? i recognise what my hon . friend says about poole harbour . it is , indeed , an incredibly beautiful part of the country . i have visited it several times and , sadly , i have also seen the extent and impact of the pollution . we are making sure that all sewage outlets are monitored through compulsory means , which is not the case currently . the commission will look at how we can improve the testing and monitoring of water quality as part of the strengthening of regulation , which will form a key part of its work . the secretary of state mentioned the importance of drainage in reducing incidents of pollution caused by flooding . will he therefore commit today , while we await the outcome of the commission , to distributing the £ 75 million allocated by the previous government to internal drainage boards , so that farmers in my constituency and others in the river hull catchment do not have to spend another winter under water ? unfortunately , the hon . gentleman is referring to commitments to spend money that did not exist . we are waiting for the chancellor to announce her budget from this dispatch box in almost exactly one week ’s time , and we will find out much more then . last year , sewage was dumped 57 times along the precious coastline of my constituency — the equivalent of 594 hours of sewage spillages . our constituents are rightly disgusted by this state of affairs . the conservatives covered up this scandal for 14 years . will my right hon . friend tell me what this new labour government will do to hold companies to account ? i thank my hon . friend for her question . i had the pleasure of visiting bournemouth west with her , and i saw for myself the impact on businesses and tourism in that part of the world . parents are frightened to let their kids go in the sea at certain times of day , when the water contamination has reached unacceptable levels . the commission will look at how we can strengthen regulation and governance to ensure that the practices that water companies have got away with over recent years can no longer happen . it will also look at how we can bring in the investment needed to repair our broken water infrastructure , so that we can drive economic growth in every part of the country , including , of course , in bournemouth west . the use of storm overflows in places such as skegby in ashfield is absolutely disgusting and it pollutes my rivers , so will the secretary of state commit to giving the water companies a deadline for ending their use ? it will be for the commission to look at what we need to do to improve infrastructure and fix the broken system that we have at the moment . we are making sure that every overflow has monitoring on it , so that we know exactly what is coming out of it . we can therefore take action against the water companies that might be responsible . in my constituency this week , as well as having sewage in our bathing waters , we have had sewage on the streets in penryn . the conservative party cut funding to the regulator in 2015 . will the secretary of state please confirm that the review will completely reset the role of the regulator ? i thank my hon . friend for her question . i had the pleasure of visiting truro and falmouth during the election , and i saw for myself the problems there . it is disgusting to see sewage bubbling up into the streets and even into some people ’s back gardens because the sewage infrastructure is so broken after the previous government failed for 14 years to bring in the investment necessary to upgrade it . the commission will look at how we secure funding and get that infrastructure rebuilt at pace , so that we can improve the situation we are hearing about . it will also look at regulation and the role of the regulator and make proposals as to how we can improve those , so that we have regulation that is fit for purpose . in kingsbridge , in my constituency , the residents are literally wading through sewage , which seeps out of the drains in heavy rain due to a mixture of increased sewage from new houses and ancient culverts that can not cope . i do not think that those residents will be encouraged by a review and a commission , which will not solve the problems they will face this winter . will the minister therefore meet me to discuss the particularly difficult and chronic problem in kingsbridge ? we need to find a solution , because we have not had one for a long time and we desperately need to sort this out . i have , of course , already taken action myself . i had the water chief executives into my office just seven days after the general election , and we agreed a programme of initial reforms , including ringfencing customers ’ money that is earmarked for investment , so that it can not be diverted and spent on undeserved multimillion - pound bonuses or dividend payments . we also have the water ( special measures ) bill going through the house of lords right now , which will ban the payment of those undeserved bonuses . it is important that we understand exactly what has gone wrong in the sector that has led to a situation where regulation does not meet the requirements of the public , businesses , the economy or the environment . key proposals will be coming out of the commission on those issues , and i hope the hon . lady will welcome them when they come forward . today , a report found that rivers in the east and in london have the worst water quality in the uk , with an alarming amount of chemicals found . citizen science has played a key role up to now in monitoring the quality of our water , so will the secretary of state join me in paying tribute to citizen scientists and volunteers and assure us that their voices will be heard in this important work ? my hon . friend makes an important point . the many campaign groups and citizen scientists have had a huge impact on raising the profile of the sewage scandal affecting our country and in pointing to some of the ways in which we can start to fix things . sir jon ’s commission will have an advisory group with representation from campaign groups and consumers . there will also be wide engagement with the public , both through the work of the commission itself and subsequently , as we work towards the reform legislation that will reset the sector once and for all . in the absence of a plan , it is always a good idea to do a review . my constituents are being failed by our local sewage infrastructure — thames water is a total and utter disgrace . however , i really welcome the secretary of state ’s statement , because i think i have found an unlikely ally . the labour government will force through building on the green belt in my constituency , with a whole host of new houses — a situation exacerbated by the failure of the liberal democrat administration in elmbridge to deliver a local plan . given the time it will take the commission to report back , and given that these new houses will require more sewerage , does the secretary of state agree that we should pause and think again about the house building targets until the review has been completed ? i thought the hon . gentleman was standing up to apologise for the fact that the conservative government did absolutely nothing for 14 years , other than watch the torrent of effluent going into our rivers , lakes and seas increase and pollute them . my hon . friend the water minister would be more than happy to meet him to discuss the issues that he raises in his constituency . i welcome the commission announced by my right hon . friend . last week , six beaches in my constituency were affected by raw sewage dumping , with two of them — joss bay and stone bay — experiencing a bad effect on their bathing water quality , but the verdict was that they were still within environment agency permitted limits . will my right hon . friend confirm that the commission will investigate regulatory standards , so that when raw sewage is dumped , there is actually a fine and a punishment for the water companies ? i must also make a declaration as a customer of southern water and a sea water swimmer . i thank my hon . friend for her question . she is , of course , a well - known environmental campaigner who stands up for her constituents and for the many businesses , including tourism businesses , that are adversely affected by the appalling state of our waters . it is clear that regulation and governance have been inadequate for a long time . this is a reset moment , where we can finally strengthen those things and deliver the clean water that her constituents , mine and those of all members across the house expect to see . diolch , mr llefarydd . water is devolved , but we in wales do not have the full range of powers needed to address this scandal . for example , the senedd can not regulate the transfer of water by private companies whose catchment area straddles the border , which of course includes the likes of hafren dyfrdwy . will the secretary of state ensure that the commission considers the full devolution of powers over water and sewage licensing to wales to empower the senedd to set higher targets ? diolch yn fawr . the commission is jointly set up by the uk government and the welsh government , and it will report back to both . it will inform the actions that both governments take subsequently , including looking at infrastructure and how we make catchment areas operate better , particularly when they cross borders , as so many do between england and wales . i congratulate the secretary of state on the launch of the independent water commission . i know my constituents in sheffield central will welcome the review . they are seeing a 25 % rise in their bills , but that does not make sense to them when shareholders continue to receive profits . will the secretary of state provide an assurance that as an outcome of the review there will be transparency , water companies will be held to account and we will reset the focus on consumers instead of company profit ? my hon . friend makes an important point . consumers must have a strong voice on the commission . they will gain that through consumer representation on the advisory group that will be working with sir jon , as the commissioner . she points to the eye - watering level of bill increases already proposed by ofwat ; alas , they are the price of tory failure . the tories allowed the water infrastructure to collapse to such an extent that it costs much more to fix it now than it would have cost had it been maintained properly through those 14 years . i can not undo the damage they caused , but i can draw a line in the sand to ensure it never happens again . when the conservatives privatised water , they created risk - free , money - printing emporiums that could pollute our coasts , including my west cornwall coast , at their convenience . although the secretary of state says that nationalisation is not in scope — one can understand why — to what extent will company governance be in scope ? will it be possible to move companies closer to becoming community benefit societies , or at least to installing a community environmental champion , not in the pay of the company , on every board , to keep watch on the company ? the hon . gentleman makes important points . the areas he refers to will be in scope for the commission . i hope he will make his own representations to ensure those points are heard and fully considered before we get the findings in the summer of next year . residents in my constituency have been disgusted by the degradation of our rural waterways across the east of england , as well as by the hollowing out of reservoir capacity across the country . i welcome the new government and the new secretary of state ’s renewed leadership on these issues , but it is clear that under the previous government weakened regulation and regulators played their part in facilitating the mess we have inherited . what assurances can he give my constituents that we will be beefing up the regulators and giving them the power they need to take the action we all want to see ? my hon . friend is absolutely right that the previous government deliberately weakened the regulators . they kept regulation too weak to hold the water companies to account and to ensure that we got the investment which could have maintained a better standard of infrastructure and stopped the level of pollution that his and everyone else ’s constituents have had to face . we have already taken steps through the water ( special measures ) bill to give the regulator more teeth . the commission will be looking root and branch at the role of regulation , governance and the regulator , to ensure we have a system that is fit for the future that will guarantee clean water for decades to come . if i heard correctly , at the start of his statement the secretary of state referred to the river lugg , which runs through the centre of my constituency . its catchment has been subject to a planning moratorium for more than five years , because of excess levels of phosphates in the river . the secretary of state will be well aware that the reason for that is not primarily sewage pollution , but agricultural run - off ; more than two thirds of the pollution is from agricultural run - off and only a quarter from sewage . however , the terms of reference for the government ’s water commission essentially make no mention of agriculture , with only a passing reference and nothing specific about addressing that problem ; likewise the water ( special measures ) bill . with such a narrow approach to addressing water pollution , the secretary of state will not be able to achieve his aim of cleaning up our rivers and seas . does he agree that the terms of reference need to be changed to incorporate full attention on agricultural pollution as well as sewage ? i hope the hon . lady will look at the terms of reference , which are available at gov.uk . they focus on the whole catchment area of rivers and include agricultural run - off , which accounts for 45 % of water pollution . where there is an interface between agriculture and polluted water , that is indeed in scope for the work of the commission . i thank the minister for his statement . the contamination and destruction of our waterways , and even of our high streets , as we saw with sewage pollution in newquay the other week , is an absolute disgrace that the previous government failed to address . with pennon group , the owner of south west water , paying £ 112 million in dividends and over £ 160 million in other finance costs , will the secretary of state ensure that the independent commission , which i greatly welcome , addresses whether we have effective funding models for our water industry ? my hon . friend is absolutely right ; it is disgusting for people to see sewage bubbling up , and not just in their high streets but even in their gardens , because of broken water infrastructure . we will be looking for a reset so that we can have a water sector that works for customers and the environment , as well as investors . the year 2 pupils of bishop tufnell school in my constituency told me how disappointed they were not to be able to swim in the sea on their summer day out last year . as a fellow sea swimmer , i share their disappointment . winter is coming and there is no time to waste . pushing the can down the track with this commission is not good enough . having reviewed the activities in my constituency , i want to know how the secretary of state will provide a strategic overview that brings together all the different agencies that impact this matter , and not some time next year but before the real issues hit every single constituency around the coast of the country right now ? i am very sorry for the year 2 pupils at the school the hon . lady mentioned . i respectfully remind her that she represents the party that sat back and did nothing for 14 years , while the levels of pollution in our rivers , lakes and seas got far worse . that , i venture to suggest , is why those year 2 pupils can not go in the water . sewage polluting cornish beaches such as those in my constituency — specifically , st agnes , where surfers against sewage has its head office , perranporth and portreath — is yet another conservative scandal that has damaged our economy and society for years , and that a labour government will now have to clear up . does the minister agree that as well as the economic damage , the damage to the mental health of those of us who can not regularly use the sea should not be underestimated ? will the commission consider the mental health benefits as part of its work ? i had the pleasure of visiting my hon . friend ’s constituency with him during the summer . i saw for myself the impact of sewage in the sea on the beautiful beaches around his part of cornwall . of course , it is not unusual for a labour government to have to come in and clean up the tories ’ mess , but rarely quite so literally as in the case of sewage in our waterways . he makes an important point about mental health . i hope he will feed that back to the commission because it is important it hears all sorts of views about the impact of polluted water as it considers how we can best clean it up . since i was elected in july , exmouth and exeter east has been hit by significant sewage issues . i am sure the secretary of state will understand that and i have written to him recently outlining some of those issues . although the commission may bear fruit in future years , there are areas of the country , such as my constituency , that need immediate fixes . will the secretary of state meet me and the chief executive of south west water to ensure that immediate fixes are put in place and maximum pressure is applied , so that we have the fixes we need and do not have to endure another summer like the one we have just had ? i welcome the hon . gentleman to his place and to this house . i hope conservative members will engage constructively with the commission , so that he can feed in his views directly . my hon . friend the minister for water and flooding is happy to meet him to discuss his local issues . my constituents do not think that yorkshire water is doing a good job . last year , sewage was discharged into the river calder 4,125 times . the same year , nichola shaw , the boss , chose to take home a bonus of £ 371,000 — or £ 90 per discharge . we have also had three major flooding incidents in calder valley over the past 15 years . regulations do not cover water companies acting against flooding . will my right hon . friend look at the breadth of the current regulations and at what water companies can do about flooding ? my hon . friend makes an important point . the water ( special measures ) bill , which is currently going through the house of lords and will soon be in this house , looks at how undeserved bonuses can be banned . the public quite rightly feel a sense of injustice that failure is being rewarded , when clearly it should not be . the points he makes about flooding are well made , and i hope he will feed those into the work of the commission as it starts its work . the environment agency used to be responsible for monitoring sewage discharges , but for more than a decade now the water companies have had the responsibility for monitoring releases via storm overflows . in the previous parliament , the environmental audit committee heard that illegal spills may have been 10 times greater than that declared by the water companies . will the new commission consider removing from water companies the monitoring of sewage discharges , or will it let them mark their own homework , as the previous government did ? there has been a wide failure in the regulation of water . that is why i have asked sir jon cunliffe , as part of the commission that he is leading , to look at regulation and the roles of the regulators — not just one of them — to ensure that we have a system that is fit for purpose . we are ensuring that , outside the commission , there is mandatory monitoring of what is coming out of all overflows , including emergency overflows . in the water ( special measures ) bill , water chief executives will be required to be open and transparent about the extent of pollution ; otherwise , they will face personal criminal liability for the first time . in 2024 alone , hartlepool ’s beautiful coastline has been marred by 49 separate incidents of sewage being discharged into our sea . at the same time , the water companies are making billions in profit . whatever the outcome of the commission , can the secretary of state commit to putting people in hartlepool and across the country ahead of profit in cleaning up this mess ? my hon . friend is absolutely right ; this sewage scandal affects the entire country , including his constituency of hartlepool . it is important that this commission focuses on ensuring that consumers and the environment come first , and that we have a water sector that serves their interests primarily . i hope that he will make his points directly to the commission , because they will value hearing from him . i was a brand - new parent when south east water cut off the water for six days for me and for thousands of my constituents . south east water is 74 % in debt — it is the second most indebted company in the land . its current investment plans rely on taking on more debt , which is then paid for through increased customer bills . clearly , that is unsustainable not just for the companies , but for the customers because of their ever - rising bills . will the secretary of state assure me that this commission will make suggestions for reducing the indebtedness of water companies ? that is an important point . the commission will be looking at the financial viability of water companies , including their levels of indebtedness . the hon . member also made the important point about what happens when water companies cut off supplies , because , frankly , compensation to individual households and businesses has been inadequate . that is something that we seek to address through the water ( special measures ) bill , which is going through parliament right now , so it need not wait for the commission . the village of upper tean , which the secretary of state may remember , has experienced flooding , burst drains , and sewage flooding into rivers and streams , killing them , for many years . and recently residents had to turn out en masse in the middle of the night to divert traffic away when the village was overwhelmed by quite a serious and urgent flood . following meetings with the environment agency , the parish council is looking into developing a flood action group , so that it can provide the resilience and the powerful voice to take action against water companies such as severn trent . will the secretary of state assure me that the commission will look at how communities such as that of upper tean can build the resilience they need and also help them develop a flood action group ? i remember very well and with pleasure the visit to which my hon . friend refers . i also remember how distressed residents were to see their homes flooded and their possessions destroyed . very often their homes were uninsurable , because of where they were located . the commission will consider all those factors . my hon . friend the water and flooding minister and i are also looking at what can be done separately to tackle the scourge of flooding to better protect communities now and into the future . i will try to get in as many people as i can , so can we please keep the questions and answers as snappy as possible ? the statement from the secretary of state is welcome , but passionate campaigners in my constituency will be concerned that , when we already know the dire state of our rivers and water courses , a review will potentially push the can down the road and delay the changes that we so desperately need . will the commission set a deadline by which water companies have to prevent all sewage discharges in sensitive sites , including chalk streams such as the lavant and ems in my constituency ? we certainly know the dire state of our waterways . we also need to know in detail the root and branch reforms required to make the corrections . we will have that from this commission by next summer , and i hope the hon . lady will take part in that . we need to clean up all of our waterways , including those very important ones to which she refers . this weekend , i met the fillongley flood action group , a small group of brave men and women who , when they receive notifications about floods , put on their waders in the middle of the night and go out and clear a culvert that is not fit for purpose . will the secretary of state join me in applauding their efforts ? will he also reassure them that this commission will look across all departments to see how we can best ensure that those culverts can accommodate the overflow from things such as smart motorways , as i am hearing that the floods have got worse since the m6 was allowed to become a smart motorway . will it also consider the economic impact on those villages when shops , hairdressers and the local pubs close , sometimes on a permanent basis ? i thank the residents of my hon . friend ’s constituency and those in other constituencies who are taking action for themselves against flooding . we have already set up and held the first meeting of the flood resilience taskforce , which will be seeking to provide better co - ordination between central government — where the resources are held — and those local agencies on the ground charged with improving work to protect people from the very damaging effects of serious flooding . last year , water company bosses in england and wales were paid £ 9.1 million in bonuses . that is while thames water proposes a 59 % increase in customer bills by 2030 . does the secretary of state therefore understand why many residents in our constituencies have lost faith in the regulator ’s ability to control these powerful firms and will he commit to replacing the regulator with one that has some teeth ? i certainly agree that residents have lost confidence not just in the regulators but in the water system at large , which is why we have set up this commission to look at how we can get regulation that is fit for purpose for the future . diolch , secretary of state . monmouthshire must be one of the only constituencies in the uk that did not get a visit from the secretary of state , but we did get a visit from feargal sharkey , which was great . i really welcome the announcement today , especially this new partnership between the welsh and uk governments , which , unfortunately , the conservative government completely failed to achieve . for example , they brought out the river wye action plan , which failed to include wales and had no new money . may i ask the secretary of state to relook at that action plan , commit to a new one that uses the river wye catchment partnership groups , the friends of the river wye , and all the different civil servants from both sides of the border . let us then use that group and help clear up the river wye . diolch yn fawr i chi . i would be very happy to visit monmouthshire . it is important that we look at the situation with water across catchments , particularly where it is crossing borders between england and wales . the fact that this commission is jointly commissioned by both governments and will report to both governments will ensure that is what happens . i am pleased to see action coming forward from the government on this , but we know that they need to go further and faster on this issue . in north norfolk , much of the infrastructure dates from the 1970s and 1980s . then , a just - about - managing approach was taken to construction and clearly it is no longer managing the situation . can the minister confirm that this commission will look specifically at directing investment from water companies to infrastructure upgrades as and where they are needed ? we certainly need fast action after 14 years of absolutely nothing . the commission will point the way to resetting the sector for the future , and will seek to establish a system that will do exactly what the hon . gentleman talks about . hundreds of residents in ruislip gardens and ruislip manor in my constituency have been flooded in recent weeks . i have met many of them who have had to move out of their homes . they are frustrated by poor regulation and buck - passing between the water authority and the local council , the flood management authority . this welcome review , after 14 years of dither and delay , is good news for my residents , but will my right hon . friend assure me and my residents that it will look specifically at the adequacy of governance and accountability mechanisms between flood management authorities and water management organisations , and will he meet with me and my constituents to discuss these issues ? i have had the pleasure of visiting my hon . friend ’s constituency many times over the past year , and i know what a concern flooding is to people living there . we have already set up a flood resilience taskforce , which will ensure better co - ordination between the centre , where resources are held , and agencies on the frontline , including those to which he refers , to ensure that people are better protected from the impact of flooding . i am sure that my hon . friend the water minister will be happy to meet with him to talk about local flooding . rose — order . if we are short and sharp , we can probably wrap up proceedings on this statement in the next several minutes , with everybody getting in . jim shannon , show us how it is done . short and sharp — my goodness , what a challenge . it is great news that accountability will , at last , be at heart of this review . northern ireland is in a similar situation regarding water , though it is a slightly different scenario , with a government - owned operator . will the secretary of state indicate how the review can help to deliver a uk - wide water service that is truly fit for purpose ? it is always a pleasure to hear from the hon . gentleman . of course water is devolved in northern ireland . it will be for the local authorities there to make their own decisions about how to correct problems in beauty spots such as lough neagh . my constituency is made up of 21 local government wards . one of them , bagots and needwood , was subjected to 3,000 hours of sewage spills in just one year . can the secretary of state assure me that , after 14 years of failure from the conservative party , the commission will leave nowhere to hide for criminal water bosses ? that is absolutely the intention . as a whitewater kayaker , i spend countless hours on rivers and streams up and down the country , so i know that both the environment agency and ofwat need to be properly resourced if we are to clear up the toxic legacy left in our waterways by the last government . can the secretary of state reassure my constituents that the newly announced independent water commission will look at resourcing to ensure that the water firms responsible for polluting our waterways are held to account ? the commission will look at identifying a model of appropriate and effective regulation for precisely the reasons my hon . friend outlines . my constituents in north east derbyshire are rightly disgusted that water bosses received over £ 41 million in bonuses and other incentives under the previous conservative government . can the secretary of state assure me that every penny of my constituents ’ hard - earned money will be spent where it is needed ? we have already announced plans to ringfence money earmarked for investment so that it can not be diverted for undeserved multimillion - pound bonuses , as happened so frequently under the previous failed conservative government . the chalk streams in north east hertfordshire and across england are of international significance , but too often these waterways are not just polluted , but running dry . will the secretary of state assure me that the commission will look at the regulation needed to bring an end to not only sewage spills , but the over - abstraction of aquifers and chalk streams ? the commission has a wide remit , and will look at the wider impact of damage to the water system , which got much worse under the previous government . as a coastal city , we welcome the commission . it is vital to sort out sewage and floods . in my constituency , parts of drayton and farlington are affected by floods — not from rivers or the sea , but because water pumps up through the drains . while it is not sewage , the water cascades down the streets into houses and shops , forcing holidaymakers to check whether they need to get people to put sandbags out to protect their property . will the secretary of state ensure that those types of floods are included in the remit of the commission , and that water companies take responsibility ? we have also set up a flood resilience taskforce , which is looking precisely at those kinds of problems related to flooding so that we can take action immediately . toothless water regulators have been left up the creek . can the secretary of state confirm that sir jon cunliffe will look at scrapping and replacing ofwat ? it will be for the commission to look at how we get to an effective and appropriate model of regulation , including the roles of the regulators . the river weaver , which runs through the town of nantwich in my constituency , suffered from a spate of devastating pollution last year , killing hundreds of fish and blighting our beautiful market town . it is believed that the cause of the pollution was slurry dumping from intense agriculture . can the secretary of state confirm that the engagement and support that farmers need to dispose of slurry mix in the appropriate way will form part of the review ? yes , the impact of run - off from agriculture will be in the scope of the commission ’s work . does my right hon . friend agree that , had the conservative party put as much energy into protecting our rivers , lakes and seas as it has into filling its reservoirs of chutzpah , my constituents in rugby would not be living with the consequences of ineffective regulation , undue profits and unearned bonuses , and that , as in so many areas , the labour party is clearing up the mess that we inherited ? the short answer to that is yes . before i call the home secretary to make her statement , i inform the house that the inquest into the death of chris kaba has been opened and adjourned . the matter is therefore technically still before the courts . however , mr speaker has granted a waiver in relation to the house ’s resolution on matters sub judice , so members may refer to it in the house ’s proceedings . with permission , madam deputy speaker , i will update the house on monday ’s verdict in the trial of sergeant martyn blake , on the accountability review into police use of force , and on confidence in policing . chris kaba was killed in streatham two years ago . his parents and family of course continue to experience deep grief and distress . a year ago , sergeant martyn blake was charged with murder , and on monday , the jury returned its verdict and sergeant blake was acquitted . it is imperative that the jury ’s verdict is respected , and that sergeant blake and his family are given the time and space that they will need to recover from what will have been an immensely difficult experience for them during both the investigation and the trial . for an armed police officer to be prosecuted for actions taken in the course of their duties is very rare , so of course this case has raised considerable concerns for the public and for the police . the decisions made on any individual case , be it by the police , the independent office for police conduct , the crown prosecution service , the courts or a jury , are rightly independent of the government , so it would not be right for me to comment further on the details of the case . however , the case has happened against a backdrop of wider and long - standing concerns about accountability , standards and confidence — a backdrop in which police officers and forces have raised long - standing concerns about the way in which the accountability system currently operates , particularly in cases of specialist policing such as firearms and driving , where we ask officers to do incredibly difficult and dangerous jobs to keep us safe , and a backdrop of fallen community confidence in policing and the criminal justice system across the country , with , as the metropolitan police commissioner said this week , lower confidence among black communities . the british policing model relies on mutual bonds of trust between the public and the police . for our policing model to work , it is essential that the police have the confidence of the communities they serve , and that officers have the confidence that they need to do their vital and often extremely difficult job of keeping us all safe . too often in recent times , both elements of that confidence have become frayed . the government have made it a mission to put confidence back into policing . as part of that work , i want to update the house on new measures that we will take forward in response to the accountability review and following ongoing work to respond to issues raised by the angiolini and casey reviews . that will be a package of reforms to rebuild confidence for police officers and for communities , to tackle the unacceptable delays and confusion in the system , and to ensure that the complexity of specialist operations is considered at an early stage and that the highest standards are upheld and maintained . twelve months ago , the previous government launched a review into the accountability systems for police use of force and police driving . the previous home secretary set out an interim response in march , which the labour party supported , and i welcome his work . the review was not completed by the election , and although we have continued to draw on evidence from police and civil society organisations , we were unable to say more publicly in the run - up to the trial , so today i will update the house . the accountability review found that the current system for holding police officers to account is not commanding the confidence of either the public or the police . accountability and misconduct proceedings are too often plagued by delays stretching for years , which is damaging for complainants , police officers and police forces alike . the system has become more complex , with confusion over multiple thresholds for different investigations , and a lack of clarity , especially on specialist capabilities . there are also wider concerns about the misconduct system . the focus when things go wrong can end up being entirely on the decisions of the individual officer , so system failings such as poor training , unmanageable caseloads or wider force practices are not sufficiently considered or followed up , meaning that too little changes . at the same time , as we saw following the casey and angiolini reviews , in cases where someone is not fit to be a police officer , it is too hard for forces to remove them , and communities feel that no one is held to account . the public must be able to expect that when officers exceed the lawful use of their powers or fail to meet proper standards , there will be rapid and robust processes in place to hold them to account . police officers who act with integrity and bravery to keep us safe each day need to know they have strong public support . if officers lack the confidence to use their powers , following their training and the law , public safety is put at risk . let me turn to the policy measures . first , we will take forward the three measures proposed by the previous government in march to strengthen and speed up the system . we will align the threshold for the referral of police officers from the independent office for police conduct to the crown prosecution service to that used by the police when referring cases involving members of the public . currently the threshold is lower for police officers — that is not justified . we will allow the iopc to send cases to the cps where there is sufficient evidence to do so , instead of having to wait for a final investigation report . and we will also put the iopc victims ’ right - to - review policy on a statutory footing to ensure that there is an appeal mechanism for bereaved families when a decision is made not to seek a charging decision . then we will go further . when officers act in the most dangerous situations on behalf of the state , it is vital that those officers and their families are not put in further danger during any subsequent legal proceedings . we will therefore introduce a presumption of anonymity for firearms officers subject to criminal trial following a police shooting in the course of their professional duties , up to the point of conviction . we will also ensure that the highly specialist nature of particular policing tactics and tools is reflected in relevant investigative guidance . that includes ensuring that in investigations of police - driving incidents , evidence from subject - matter experts and in - car video footage is considered at the earliest possible opportunity , and , more widely , that an officer ’s compliance with their training and guidance is appropriately taken into account in investigative decision making . i also have established a rapid review of two specific areas where recent legal judgments have meant that we now have different thresholds for criminal , misconduct and inquest investigations , adding complexity , confusion and delay to the system . in particular , that review will consider the legal test for use of force in misconduct proceedings , and the threshold for determining short - form findings of unlawful killing in inquests . the independent review will be conducted by tim godwin and sir adrian fulford , and will report jointly to me and the lord chancellor by the end of january . i have asked for further work to be done on timeliness , standards and misconduct procedures as part of our wider policing reforms . my right hon . friend the attorney general has invited the director of public prosecutions to examine the cps guidance and processes in relation to charging police officers for offences committed in the course of their duties . following calls from civil society organisations , we will ask the college of policing to establish a national “ lessons learned ” database for deaths or serious injuries arising from police contact or police pursuits , so that when tragic incidents occur , there is a responsibility to ensure that lessons are incorporated into the development of police training and guidance , and to prevent the repetition of such events . to rebuild public confidence in the wider standards regime for policing , we also need to ensure that there is faster progress in responding to the findings of the angiolini and casey reviews on vetting and standards . we will therefore take forward in this parliamentary session previously agreed proposals to ensure that officers convicted of certain criminal offences are automatically found to have committed gross misconduct ; to create a presumption of dismissal where gross misconduct is found ; and to change regulations to enable chief constables to promptly dismiss officers who fail their vetting — there has been a glaring gap in the system there for far too long . we will go further to ensure that standards are upheld : we will ensure that there is a statutory underpinning for national vetting standards , and strengthen requirements relating to the suspension of officers under investigation for domestic abuse or sexual offences . finally , we need wider measures to restore confidence in policing and the criminal justice system across all communities . that must include further work to take forward the met ’s london race action plan , on which action has already been taken , though the met commissioner and the mayor for london have made it clear that there is much more work to do . we need progress from the national police chiefs ’ council on the national police race action plan . the government are also determined to take forward further measures , ranging from the introduction of neighbourhood policing to new police force performance standards , to strengthen confidence in policing in every community across the country . the measures that i have outlined are practical steps to rebuild confidence , tackle delays , provide clarity and ensure that high standards are maintained . for almost 200 years , policing by consent has been the bedrock of british policing . the government are determined to take the necessary action to strengthen public confidence in the police , and to strengthen the confidence of the police when they are out on the street every day , doing the difficult job of keeping us all safe . those are the twin goals that we must all work towards . i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow home secretary . i thank the home secretary for advance sight of her statement , and for the recent privy council briefing that i received from her . i very much welcome what the home secretary has set out . i agree with almost all of it and disagree with almost none of it . as a society , we demand that our firearms officers put themselves in dangerous and difficult situations to protect others . every firearms officer in the uk is a volunteer , and although we rightly value having have a predominantly unarmed police force , we do of course need a cadre of armed police officers across the country . i have had the privilege of visiting the police firearms training centre in gravesend , and i have seen at first hand just how rigorous that firearms training regime is — not just in marksmanship , but in the use of judgment . split - second life - or - death decisions must be made , often in circumstances in which the risk picture is incomplete and the cost of not acting is considerably more severe than the cost of acting . in all our debate and conversation about the use of force by police , that fundamental truth should be at the forefront of our minds . as the right hon . lady said , we rightly expect that all officers will act with restraint and professionalism at all times , but we can not allow circumstances to be created in which officers are disincentivised from being decisive , or become unwilling to take the right action for fear of trial by media or a long period of suspension under investigation . i am grateful to the home secretary for acknowledging in her statement that when my party was in government — under my predecessors and led predominantly by my right hon . friend the commitment that such investigations will be more speedy is key . specifically , it is important that the home secretary continues with the conservatives ’ proposal to allow the iopc to refer cases to the cps earlier . prolonged periods of uncertainty undermine the confidence of both police officers and the public they serve . i am pleased to see that the government are continuing with our reforms to ensure that when police officers act in accordance with their training , and in the line of duty , they are not subject to a lower threshold for prosecutions than members of the general public . i ask the home secretary to seriously consider ensuring that training in those roles forms a legitimate part of the defence of officers if and when criminal prosecutions are brought forward . i particularly welcome the move to introduce a presumption of anonymity for firearms officers subject to criminal trial following a shooting . we now know that chris kaba was involved with a violent gang , and that sergeant blake and his family had — and still have — a well founded fear of violent reprisals . that fear was amplified when sergeant blake ’s name was put in the public domain . in the light of the review by dr gillian fairfield , what further recommendations is the home secretary minded to take forward ? does she recognise that in the era of social media , all people of public profile , including members of this house , should be very thoughtful and careful about making public statements when facts are unknown or contested ? the police should know instinctively that they will have the backing of both their chain of command and the politicians involved in their governance , at all levels , when they do the right thing at our behest , and that they will be backed by their chain of command even if those actions are not popular or convenient . we have too often seen police leadership bend to inappropriate levels of public pressure . in conclusion , i welcome the statement from the home secretary , and her commitment to taking forward the reforms of the police accountability review . conservative members will work constructively with her to ensure that the appropriate balance is struck to reinforce confidence in policing , and the confidence of police . i thank the shadow home secretary for his response . i hope that there will be widespread agreement on both sides of the house on the importance of these issues , which go to the heart of the british tradition of policing by consent . all of us want to know that there is proper accountability for decisions that police forces and officers make , but also that the police have the confidence to take what are sometimes the most difficult decisions of all to keep the rest of us safe . the shadow home secretary is right that firearms officers have to deal with some of the most difficult parts of policing , sometimes having to make split - second decisions in fast - moving and difficult circumstances that none of us would want to be in . frankly , if any of us were in those situations , we would want to know that there were firearms police officers there to protect and support us . in the uk , police officers discharging firearms is very rare , particularly compared with other countries . that reflects the nature of our unarmed policing tradition , as well as the professionalism and training of the police , and the different ways in which they manage often very difficult situations , but of course they need to know that when they follow their training and operate within the law , they will have our support for the difficult decisions that they have to take , and will not find their lives upturned as a result . the anonymity provisions are important , and i hope that they will have support from the whole house . the government want to bring in the presumption of anonymity in the forthcoming crime and policing bill . the shadow home secretary also raised the issue of training . i want that to be looked at when the investigative guidance is updated ; that way , it can be addressed relatively quickly to ensure that issues around police driving and training more widely are taken into account in early investigative decisions before cases are pursued . on the fairfield review , we are taking forward further measures , and will look , in wider policing reforms , at how the iopc needs to work . it is important that we continue to have an independent process . that has to be set against the backdrop of the wider policing reforms that are needed to ensure that we strengthen confidence for both officers and communities . that is how we will maintain for the new generation the proud british tradition of policing by consent . i call the mother of the house , diane abbott . first , i express my sympathy for chris kaba ’s family and his mother . whatever he was or did , he was her son , and she deserves our sympathy and respect . i also acknowledge my hon . friend the home secretary will know that over the years there have been a series of deaths at the hands of the metropolitan police that have led to deep unhappiness and even riots . one death that comes to mind is that of cynthia jarrett in 1985 , who died of a heart attack when four policemen burst into her house , and whose death triggered the broadwater farm riots . does the home secretary accept that nothing could be more damaging for police - community relations than if the idea took hold that in some way the police were above the law ? i thank my right hon . friend for her points . i know that she has worked on and addressed these issues over many years , and how important she sees them as being . she is right to raise concerns around incidents where lives are lost , and to recognise the distress that will be felt by chris kaba ’s mother and family . i also recognise the work that my hon . friend my right hon . friend makes an important point : at every stage in the process , these decisions have to be for the independent judiciary , the courts and the police prosecutors . our role in this house is to provide the framework within which those individual decisions are then made , but i also agree that ultimately , all these measures have to have the confidence of communities across london and across the country . if they do not , that proud british tradition of policing by consent is lost , which is deeply damaging for police officers and policing , as well as for all our public safety . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . i also thank the home secretary for advance sight of her statement . any case in which a young person ’s life is cut short is a tragedy , and my thoughts are with all those who are impacted by this awful situation . it is crucial that we in this place respect the judiciary and their right to make decisions without political interference . however , a case like this one does not happen in a vacuum — we must remember the wider context . as baroness casey said in her review , black londoners are “ under - protected and over - policed ” . a huge and radical step is required to regain police legitimacy and trust among london ’s black communities . those findings can not and should not be ignored , which means working together to rebuild community relationships and trust in the police , something that is vital to the very fabric of policing by consent . with that in mind , i welcome the home secretary ’s commitment to pick up the accountability review . when it comes to firearms officers ’ accountability when operating under enormous pressure , ambiguity benefits nobody — not police officers , and certainly not our communities . i would , however , welcome more details from the home secretary about how those communities with the least trust in the police , especially ethnic minority communities , will be consulted in this review . these questions extend past the met , so will other police forces — including my own greater manchester police — be involved in the review , and will the home secretary commit to commission an independent review of the implementation of the casey review ’s recommendations ? rebuilding trust in the police has got to be our priority , for the sake of our whole community and for ethnic minority communities , and for the officers who are working hard to keep us safe in difficult circumstances . i thank the hon . member for the important points she has made . she is right that lack of clarity , uncertainty , and the long and damaging delays that we have had in the system benefit no one , but she is also right to say that part of the sensitivity around this case — part of its long - standing backdrop — is the much lower confidence in policing among black londoners and the different levels of confidence around race . that was highlighted as part of the casey review , and it is why the met police have set out a race action plan , but both the met commissioner and the mayor of london have been clear that there is significant additional work to do . if any measures do not have the confidence of all communities that the police serve , that will ultimately undermine the crucial principle of policing by consent . we continue to work to ensure that some of the measures recommended by the casey review that have national implications , as well as the angiolini review , are taken forward as part of this package . those include issues with vetting and misconduct processes — it is important that we make progress on those measures , as well as on some of the issues that arise from the accountability review . we will also ensure that all communities are involved in the way in which measures are taken forward . the fatal shooting of chris kaba caused pain to his family and considerable fear and anger , not only in my community but across london . this house must understand that the concerns being raised are not anti - police , but pro - accountability . we must respect our legal processes , and it is extremely rare that police officers ever face such prosecution . the home secretary clearly agrees that while police officers work under exceptional pressures , any loss of life following police contact must be properly investigated , so is she concerned by comments from the metropolitan police commissioner regarding disciplinary processes , including that firearms officers should be exempt from criminal charges over fatal shootings ? that would do nothing to rebuild broken trust and confidence , particularly within the black community , who have been disproportionately impacted . following the angiolini and casey reviews , is less accountability the route that the head of the met should be asking for ? i thank my hon . friend for her question — as i said , she has worked hard to represent her communities . it is clear that there must be a proper framework for legal accountability for police forces and individual officers . there must always be investigations where there is loss of life following police contact — that is always appropriate . although we want investigations to take place much more swiftly , all the police chiefs whom i have talked to as part of this work feel strongly that there must be a clear accountability system , which provides confidence to communities and to police officers who make difficult decisions in the line of duty . police , parliament and the public will recognise that we need to have the confidence of communities , as well as police officers who are confident that they will be able to do their job . i call the chair of the home affairs select committee . i thank the home secretary for her statement and for advance sight of it . although the measures that she has announced are welcome , many of them will take time to introduce . in the meantime , what is she doing to ensure confidence throughout the system , and will she ensure that the home affairs committee is kept updated on progress in making these welcome changes ? i thank the chair of the home affairs select committee for those important points . we are working at pace : we have set out planned legislation in the king ’s speech — the crime and policing bill — and there are a series of areas where we believe these measures can be taken forward as part of that process . in some areas , we may be able to make progress through regulations ; in others , it is simply about changing the guidance . we have set out some timetables as part of the briefing , which will be made public . everybody who wants more detail on the individual measures will be able to find that information on the home office website . this afternoon i will ensure that all those details are sent to the home affairs committee . i thank the home secretary for her statement , and i also commend my hon . friend my hon . friend makes an important point : we need to see progress on the met police ’s race action plan , which responds to serious findings in the casey review . that review raised wider issues as well , but it is essential that that action is taken . both the mayor and the met commissioner have made strong commitments to ensure progress continues to be made , and i know that london mps will also want to see that action taken . we can not have reports released without follow - up . i very much welcome the home secretary ’s statement . there is a lot of concern in my constituency about the fact that sergeant blake was prosecuted in the first place . we are all conscious of the amazing work of our wonderful police to keep us safe every day , so will the home secretary set out in more detail what additional protections will be introduced to ensure that our police are protected as they go about their job of protecting us ? i thank the right hon . member for his question . under the reforms that we have set out following wide examination of the different evidence , where there are investigations — and there will need to be investigations in individual cases — they can happen much more speedily . the threshold for referring cases from the independent office for police conduct to the cps is no longer lower than it is for members of the public when they are investigated for a crime . that is not justified or appropriate , and it is right that that threshold should be brought back in line . we also want to ensure that issues of training and specialist capabilities are taken into account at a very early stage in investigations , and we will be revising the guidance for investigations to ensure that happens . the attorney general has asked the director of public prosecutions to review cps guidance on charging in cases where officers use force in the line of duty , as i said in my statement . there is a series of areas where we are ensuring that the system can work more effectively , but , crucially , this is about raising confidence for the public as well as for police officers . i thank the home secretary for her statement . i also send my condolences to the family , friends and loved ones of chris kaba , particularly this week while the media are using racist gang tropes to justify his killing . some 1,900 people have died in police custody since 1990 . the police have protections , while our black communities are over - policed and under - supported . will the home secretary give assurances that we and our communities will be kept safe and that the police , who already have the protections they need , will not be given extra protections ? the framework i have set out is about ensuring a proper system of accountability for police forces and police officers — i think that all police officers will support it as immensely important — for how they use their powers . however , we also must tackle the hugely long delays , and the complexity , in the system . the different thresholds and the concerns that specialist capabilities , such as driving and firearms , are not taken into account at an early stage in investigations , end up with serious problems much later , as firearms officers or other police officers feel that they do not have confidence or clarity about their responsibilities or how they can use their powers . equally , communities must not feel that they are being let down because they do not have timely investigations , and conclusions and answers , to their concerns . sergeant blake has gone through two years of living hell for simply doing his duty and keeping the british public safe . will the home secretary join us at reform uk in commending his bravery to send out a clear message to all our brave police officers that this place has their backs ? police officers , who do immensely difficult work across the country every day to keep us safe , deserve our strong support . they often show huge bravery in the most difficult circumstances . i have attended the police bravery awards every year for 14 years to recognise and support the work that police officers do , often in the most difficult of circumstances . i think those officers all believe it is important that we have a system in which communities can feel confident in the work that police officers do , and that they as officers can continue to do that work to keep us safe every single day . i pay tribute to the majority of police officers , who go to work and do a decent job . often , police officers themselves are as disgusted as the general public when misconduct takes place in police forces . does my right hon . friend the home secretary agree that there is a connection between the delays in police investigations , the delays in the criminal justice system and the delays in misconduct hearings , and that these things have to be taken in the round ? in my community , we had the case of dalian atkinson , who was killed by a police officer who is now serving time in prison after using a taser . will the review look at the use of tasers as part of its work ? we want the college of policing to be able to set up a lessons learned database to make sure that action is taken when , for example , there are deaths or serious injuries following police contact . even when such cases are investigated and reforms , measures or recommendations are made , too often those are not followed up and are not actually implemented . as a result , bereaved families can feel badly let down . it is important not only that we have a clear framework of standards , but that when things go wrong , a proper system is in place to ensure that lessons are learned and things can be improved for the future . i am sure most fair - minded people will feel that the home secretary has got the balance exactly right , particularly as she has now brought in the presumption of anonymity . may i draw her attention to a surprisingly detailed report by the courts correspondent of the evening standard ? he seems to have had access to police intelligence reports about a £ 10,000 reward being offered by gangs to identify , and presumably wreak reprisals against , the sergeant concerned . what is concerning to me is that a metropolitan police spokesman says : “ this was investigated and protective measures taken . the investigation is now closed . ” i would have thought that , if there were intelligence indicating that a hit was being arranged , the investigation should not be closed until the perpetrators were themselves arrested . i thank the right hon . member for that question . it is clearly important that police officers who face threats or risks as a result of the job they do and the difficult situations they find themselves in because of their work to keep us safe have strong protection and support . he will know that i can not comment on an individual case and certainly not on an individual investigation . those are rightly independent operational decisions for police forces . however , i think more widely that everyone will want to make sure that officers who do difficult jobs do have the support that they need . the balance between ensuring that our police have the powers and tools they need to keep our streets safe and ensuring that they are not above the law is a delicate one . in that light , i welcome the home secretary ’s statement , and indeed the response of the shadow home secretary . does the home secretary agree , however , that some of the comments in the media yesterday — and , indeed , from members of the house such as my hon . friend makes an important point . it is an important british tradition that we respect the rule of law , which means that individual decisions are made by the police , prosecutors , the courts and juries independently of anything that the government do and independently of anything that politicians do or say . we all operate within legal frameworks , as you reminded us at the beginning of the statement , madam deputy speaker . i am sure all of us would want to respect that , but also to support all of those independent institutions in the complex and challenging work that they do . we can set the framework , but they have to take the individual decisions . when i first started my work supporting young people in london to get out of crime and gangs , 75 % of violent crime in london was committed by people aged under 30 and people in that age group were four times more likely to be victims of crime themselves . for the police to get on top of this , there must be restored confidence between young people and the police , which has been so eroded in recent years , but we must also invest in community policing , which was cut so much by the last government . what will the home secretary do to rectify those things and to give young people the trust in the police that they need and deserve ? the hon . member makes an important point , because often when we talk about trust and confidence for communities , young people , who are frequently those who have the most contact with the police , feel left out of those discussions . it is important that they , too , have confidence in the police to keep them safe . restoring neighbourhood policing and having back in our communities police officers who know the local area , and whom young people can get to know , is one of the most important and powerful ways to rebuild trust and make sure that everybody has confidence . that is also how we prevent crime and damage in communities . it is important that such officers remain anonymous until conviction , and i fully back this statement . as the home secretary will know , it is not just the officers facing trial who have to go through intimidation and threats , but their families . justice is essential , as is protecting our brave officers . will the home secretary join me in acknowledging the huge toll that these policing roles can take not just on officers , but on their families ? i agree . families often face some of the most challenging burdens and pressures , and we hear from police officers that their concern about the impact on their families often affects them strongly . that is why the presumption of anonymity to the point of conviction is really important to support families , as well as officers . first , i put on the record my support and gratitude to all our frontline police officers in the firearms departments for the difficult , challenging and high - pressure work that they do , including sergeant blake and his family . there is much to commend in your statement , home secretary , so i welcome it , particularly the anonymity for officers facing investigation and the timeline for the review , which is really important . two critical words came up in your statement : “ confidence ” and “ accountability ” . there is a lot of concern that confidence in the independent office for police conduct and in the crown prosecution service is falling . in fact , among police officers , particularly those in the firearms departments , confidence is frankly collapsing , and that is not a good place to be . even the jury in the chris kaba case wrote a letter to the judge — they wanted it to be read out , but he decided not to — in which they expressed astonishment and a lack of confidence in the iopc and the cps . the point about accountability relates not just to police officers , but to the iopc and the cps . does the home secretary still have confidence in the leadership of the iopc and the cps , or should that be changed ? order . before the home secretary responds , i remind members that when they use the word “ you ” , they are speaking to the chair . please be short and sharp , home secretary , so that we can get everybody in . thank you , madam deputy speaker . the accountability review found that the accountability system does not currently have confidence among communities or policing . that is why we are setting out very practical reforms . it is important that the work of the iopc and the cps is done independently of politicians , police officers and communities . they have to take decisions within the law and within the framework that parliament sets . that is why this review and this announcement are about how we amend that framework so that they can do their jobs . last saturday in my constituency of portsmouth north and paulsgrove , i held a joint coffee morning with the local police to give residents an opportunity to raise concerns directly with officers and to encourage people to sign up to the let ’s talk platform , which allows portsmouth police to share information and concerns directly with the public . does the home secretary agree that one way to rebuild public confidence in policing is to restore visible local patrols and rebuild the community policing that has been eroded over many years ? i agree with my hon . friend . neighbourhood policing has to be at the heart of restoring or rebuilding the confidence of communities in policing . i welcome much of what the home secretary has said . the police officers we are talking about , including martyn blake , are often deployed to protect local communities from violent criminal gang members , as he was doing . does the home secretary agree that for a local mp to describe one such violent gang member as a “ well - loved ” member of the community , and for the runnymede trust to describe as unaccountable a police officer who was subject to a full court hearing and process undermines , rather than builds , community confidence ? it is really important that we have the full confidence of communities in the police and the confidence of police to be able to do their jobs . decisions on individual cases are rightly for independent organisations , whether that be the courts or the misconduct process , but those have to operate within a framework and it is our responsibility to make sure that the framework is right . it is currently not right and that is why we have set out the reforms within which those organisations need to take decisions . i thank my right hon . friend for her timely and important announcement . my former colleagues in the police service up and down our country run towards danger on the public ’s behalf , pursue dangerous criminals on the public ’s behalf and — very rarely , as we have heard today — have to use lethal force on the public ’s behalf . does the home secretary agree that if our police officers do not have the confidence to do those things , the law - abiding public will ultimately suffer ? my hon . friend is right . we must maintain everyone ’s confidence — the police must have confidence , as must communities . ultimately , if communities do not have confidence , policing is undermined , but if police officers do not have confidence , our public safety is undermined , because it means that they can not do their job . that is why we have put confidence at the heart of our mission for safer streets . i , too , welcome the home secretary ’s statement and plan . firearms officers are highly skilled specialists , and my constituents are concerned that cases like this one will disincentivise our brave police officers from taking the additional responsibility of carrying firearms . will she comment on what she is hearing about the recruitment and retention of firearms officers , so that we can reassure the public that armed police officers will be available , should we need them ? the hon . member makes an important point . as part of the accountability review , concerns were raised around recruitment and retention , especially from people concerned about the impact on their families . that family issue is so important . that is why we have the presumption of anonymity to the point of conviction and some of the wider reforms , which will , i hope , maintain confidence among communities and police officers . an armed robbery was reported at our new thorne banking hub last week ; i send my warmest thoughts to the staff who endured that terrible event . will my right hon . friend join me in thanking the officers who responded to the situation ? does she also agree that public confidence in policing will grow with more patrols in neighbourhoods in the future ? i agree with my hon . friend that people feel more confident if they know who their local police officers are . that builds a sense of confidence , which also helps to prevent crime . i thank the secretary of state very much for her statement and for the confidence that she is clearly putting in her police officers . we all admire their courage and bravery in what they do . policing is devolved in northern ireland , as she knows , but the ramifications of this decision could be far - reaching . last week , i had the opportunity to speak to the chief constable of the police service of northern ireland , and this issue was part of our conversation . every police officer in northern ireland carries a weapon because of the high threat levels from terrorism . their lives are on the line every day they are on the beat — that is the life of a police officer in northern ireland — so it is very important that we recognise the threats . will the home secretary have discussions with the chief constable and the policing and finance ministers in northern ireland about how we can move forward on these issues to protect our police officers ? that is critical . i thank the hon . member for the question . interestingly , some of the accountability issues are very similar or the same for england and wales and for northern ireland , but there are differences in some areas . we have looked at those and i hope that they will be looked at further as part of the ongoing work and reviews that i have raised . however , this is all fundamentally about how we make sure that we raise standards and raise confidence across the board , including for officers and communities . does my right hon . friend the home secretary agree that the overwhelming majority of police officers are a credit to our communities and our country ? in my constituency of rugby , i have always found that the commitment of senior and rank - and - file officers to protecting the public and taking on criminals is matched by their understanding that they must be held to the highest standards . does she agree that our responsibility as politicians in this house and in our constituencies is to help all involved in achieving both those important and interlinked objectives ? i agree . police officers across the country do a totally amazing job . it is often a difficult job : they keep us safe , and they have to face difficult situations that none of us would want to be in . they also believe in high standards , which is why so many police officers and police chiefs want to ensure that the system is more effective at rooting out those who badly fail those standards and who should not be serving in the police . police officers want to maintain high standards , but they also want to know that where officers are doing their duty to keep us safe and operating in line with their training and the law , they have our strong support . we must ensure that confidence works both ways : that we have confidence in policing and that the police have the confidence to do their difficult job of keeping us safe . rose — order . the hon . member was not here for the absolute beginning , but she made it just in time for the opening statements , so i will call her . i am grateful , madam deputy speaker . building trust and confidence in the police requires time and honest reflection about the challenges , alongside meaningful steps to improve things . often , when there are high - profile incidents , there is a knee - jerk reaction and a national debate is sparked . does the home secretary agree that we must avoid knee - jerk reactions , that there needs to be a long - term commitment to building trust and confidence , and that trust and confidence are built through effective policing not just for serious violent crime , but for so - called low - level crimes such as antisocial behaviour and theft ? i agree that some of the issues around confidence are actually about the responsiveness of police and about having neighbourhood policing and a local response . my hon . friend is right . we need to respond to major reviews such as the casey review and the angiolini review , which found failings around standards , systems and vetting , for example . we must ensure that everything we do responds to those broader reviews , as well as recognising difficult individual incidents , to boost confidence . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . my constituency of richmond park , being both particularly attractive and within easy reach of westminster , is a popular spot for visits by right hon . and hon . members in all parts of the house . in fact , it is so popular with i am grateful to the hon . member for notice of her point of order . may i check whether she notified indicated assent . i see the hon . member nodding . as mr speaker has repeatedly told the house , a member who intends to visit another member ’s constituency other than in a purely private capacity must first make every reasonable effort to inform that member . that applies whatever the purpose of the visit . i hope that all hon . members will observe that important courtesy . presentation and first reading ( layla moran presented a bill to decriminalise rough sleeping ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on presentation and first reading ( layla moran presented a bill to make provision about the content and use of non - disclosure agreements ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on presentation and first reading ( layla moran , supported by alex sobel , kit malthouse , calum miller , andy mcdonald , ellie chowns , mr alistair carmichael , tom morrison and andy slaughter , presented a bill to make provision in connection with the recognition of the state of palestine . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time on ordered , that , at today ’s sitting : ( i ) notwithstanding ( ii ) the speaker shall put the questions necessary to dispose of proceedings on the motion in the name of lucy powell relating to independent expert panel not later than one hour after the commencement of proceedings on that motion ; such questions shall include the questions on any amendments selected by the speaker which may then be moved ; proceedings on that motion may continue , though opposed , after the moment of interruption ; and ( iii ) the speaker shall put the questions necessary to dispose of proceedings on the motion in the name of lucy powell relating to voting by proxy ( serious long - term illness or injury ) not later than one hour after the commencement of proceedings on that motion ; such questions shall include the questions on any amendments selected by the speaker which may then be moved ; proceedings on that motion may continue , though opposed , after the moment of interruption ; and i beg to move , that the infected blood compensation scheme regulations 2024 ( si , 2024 , no . 872 ) , dated let us start by reminding ourselves why we are here today . the infected blood scandal is a mark of shame on the british state . the infected blood inquiry ’s final report , which was published on the infected blood inquiry ’s second interim report , published in 2023 , set out 18 recommendations on compensation , informed by sir robert francis kc ’s 2022 compensation scheme study . the inquiry was unequivocal that a compensation scheme must be set up immediately . the regulations before the house are essential for delivering that compensation scheme and getting money to people as quickly as we can . in may , when the now prime minister and i responded to sir brian langstaff ’s inquiry , we were absolutely clear . i said : “ one of the most powerful conclusions in this report is that an apology is meaningful only if it is accompanied by action”.—[official report , today , with the regulations and the compensation scheme , we are delivering that action and taking another step on the road to the justice that has been so cruelly delayed . my constituent alex robinson lost her father to this scandal in 2006 , having been his carer since the age of 13 . in her words : “ he never got to walk me down the aisle or hold his grandchildren . ” she is incredibly concerned about getting justice . can the minister confirm that my constituent , along with all the families , will receive legal support to ensure that they can make their application to the compensation scheme successfully ? i am sure the whole house will join me in expressing our sympathies with the situation that my hon . friend ’s constituent and her family have been through . the infected blood compensation authority will aim to ensure that appropriate advice and support is available to assist people in managing their compensation awards , in accessing financial services and , where relevant , in accessing benefits advice . sir robert francis kc recommended in his report that legal support be available to people who want to claim compensation ; the government and i have accepted that recommendation . we will work with the infected blood compensation authority to develop the package of support services . one of the report ’s recommendations is that charities and support organisations that provide advice to victims and their families be placed on a statutory funding basis . can the minister confirm that the government ’s intention is to implement that recommendation ? if i understand the hon . gentleman ’s intervention correctly , he is talking about the different organisations that already exist . we will consider all the recommendations in the round , but he is absolutely right to highlight the hugely important role of those organisations . the infected blood compensation authority will look to work with the different support organisations . that is vital . the scheme is based on the recommendations and principles put forward by the inquiry . in line with those , and supported by advice from the inquiry response expert group , it was updated following the engagement exercise that sir robert francis kc undertook in june with victims and representatives of the infected blood community . the government have sought to design a fair and comprehensive compensation scheme , which will also be quick and simple for eligible applicants to access . i turn first to eligibility . the scheme and the regulations define people who are eligible as infected people , in line with recommendation 2 of the inquiry ’s second interim report . that covers people infected with hiv , hepatitis c and hepatitis b , and it includes people directly infected by treatment with blood as well as people indirectly infected via transmission from a directly infected person . secondly , the regulations establish a core route for claiming compensation as an infected person . the core route provides for compensation to be awarded under five categories or heads of loss , as set out in recommendation 6 of the inquiry ’s report : an injury impact award , a social impact award , a care award , a financial loss award and an autonomy award . together , they will comprise the total compensation award to infected individuals , or to the estate of any deceased infected individuals , to recognise the wide - ranging harm resulting from their infection . earlier this year , the victims and prisoners act 2024 established the infected blood compensation authority in law to deliver the scheme . i am proud to have campaigned with many members across the house to have delivered that change in legislation ; i pay tribute to the regulations before the house will provide the infected blood compensation authority with the legal powers that it needs to begin making payments . they also provide further detail on how it will accept applications and pay awards . the authority , under the chairmanship of sir robert francis , has been working hard to design and implement effective , simple and secure processes that put the infected blood community at the heart of its work . last week , the infected blood compensation authority reached out to the very first claimants under the scheme . the authority is taking a test - and - learn approach that will ensure that it can take feedback on board and improve the service before it opens its full compensation service . i hope that that step provides confidence that we are absolutely committed to driving forward progress to meet our shared intention of beginning payments by the end of this year , as i have previously said to the house . i will do everything in my power to ensure that all those who are entitled to compensation receive it as soon as possible . i am grateful to the minister for giving way . i commend him for the way in which he is handling this very sensitive matter ; he has got the tone just right . on behalf of a constituent , mr a , who was infected by being born of a mother who was infected , i have corresponded with sir robert francis kc . if my constituent were here , he would be keen to know that the compensation scheme will cover people in his circumstances , both for their physical and mental distress . for the avoidance of doubt , could the minister please confirm that those people will be covered by the scheme as well ? yes . first of all , and i am sure i speak for everyone in the house , i express my sympathies to the right hon . gentleman ’s constituent and his family . the right hon . gentleman is entirely right to raise the case directly with sir robert francis . i urge members across the house to look up the details of the infected blood compensation authority on the gov.uk website and point their constituents in that direction — the authority is already setting out newsletters — and to do as the right hon . gentleman has done and write directly to the authority . on the basis of being infected through transmission from his mother , his constituent clearly fits the category of an infected person under the scheme . he is precisely the kind of person the scheme is designed to help . the right hon . gentleman is right to raise the case on the floor of the house today in this debate . i am very grateful to the minister for giving way . this has been a long , long journey for the people who have been affected by this scandal — and that is exactly what it has been . can he clarify an issue that has been raised about inheritance tax ? given that many payments will be paid to the very elderly , many second generation recipients are worried about inheritance tax . will they be exempt from inheritance tax ? is that possible ? yes , the awards are exempt from inheritance tax and capital gains tax . that is precisely how the scheme has been designed . i hope that gives reassurance to the hon . gentleman . let me move on to the points raised by the secondary legislation scrutiny committee , as it is important that i address them . as the committee noted , the infected blood scandal stretches back over many decades , and access to records , in particular medical evidence , will be very challenging — i acknowledge that . that is at the very heart , as i am sure hon . and right hon . members will understand , of the challenge of trying to address an injustice that has been allowed to continue for so many decades . where that is the case , the authority will need to make objective decisions relying on the evidence that is available in order to determine , on the balance of probabilities , that treatment with infected blood occurred . the authority will — i expect it to do this — provide assistance to those who believe that their medical records have been lost or destroyed , and evidencing eligibility will be easier , faster and more compassionate than , for example , one would experience through any court proceedings . the committee highlighted the complexity of the regulations . that is why , alongside the publication of the regulations and the explanatory memorandum , the government published a detailed policy paper in august on how the compensation scheme will operate , setting out what individuals can expect to receive , including case study examples . additionally , the infected blood compensation authority will ensure that appropriate advice and support is available to assist people with managing their compensation awards , accessing financial services and accessing benefits advice where relevant , as i set out in response to an earlier intervention by my hon . friend thirdly , the committee raised questions on how claimants will receive payments . as set out in recommendation 10 of the infected blood inquiry ’s second interim report , the regulations include a mechanism for electing for periodic compensation payments or a lump sum . that is responding to the wishes of those who have told us that they wanted that option to be available to them . we have also provided an alternative for those currently receiving support scheme payments through the infected blood support schemes . the so - called ibss route was developed following the recommendations of sir robert francis kc , following his engagement with representatives of the infected blood community . the clearest finding from that engagement was around the continuation of the existing support scheme payments . the government have listened , and we have agreed and accepted that support scheme payments will continue for life for those who elect the ibss route . the route will be available for those who applied to be registered on a support scheme on or before michael in my constituency will benefit from the compensation , and i commend the minister and the government for their swift action . how do we ensure that we maintain trust in the process ? is there an opportunity for victims to review any aspects of the compensation scheme that may not be working ? my hon . friend makes a powerful point about trust in the process . the scheme is designed to have a core route , and a supplemental route for particular issues around care claims or financial loss that are not appropriately captured in the core route . there is also provision around review and appeals to the first - tier tribunal , which is important . one of the purposes of having a tariff - based scheme is to try to make it simpler and easier to access , so that the need for subsequent appeals is minimised . i know that the house speaks as one when it comes to paying long overdue compensation to those impacted by this harrowing scandal . following the passing of the victims and prisoners act , these regulations are the next substantial step towards getting money to people who rightly deserve it . however , although there has been progress , the work is far from finished . a second set of regulations will provide for other elements of the compensation scheme , including compensation payments to those who are affected and for claims outside the core route . subject to parliamentary approval , the government aim for the second set of regulations to be in place by there is shared determination across the house to deliver compensation as swiftly as possible and with the minimum delay . i hope that today , hon . members across the house can agree that these regulations are a significant step towards that . i thank the paymaster general for advance notice of the statutory instrument being laid , as he has always given . he rightly reminded the house of the injustice that victims of the infected blood scandal have been subject to — one that has spanned several decades . i hope that we are now in rapid delivery mode . my role is to ensure that the government are doing all they can to deliver compensation as swiftly and effectively as possible for the infected and affected , following the passage of the bill under the previous government . as the right hon . gentleman knows , it is also my duty to work collaboratively with the government on this matter , supporting them and scrutinising them where appropriate . to that end , i wish to set out some issues raised with me by representatives of the infected and affected communities . first , i draw the right hon . gentleman ’s attention to the secondary legislation scrutiny committee ’s second report of the session , which found the explanatory memorandum to be “ overly complex and technical , while lacking basic information about the policy ” . to some extent , i very much sympathise . this is a very complicated matter . i suspect that the right hon . gentleman will agree that this critical information should be easily accessible to all . can he assure the house that he will do everything he can to ensure that the explanatory memorandum to the second set of regulations will be much clearer in language and in outlining how the policy will work practically ? he rightly referred to the detailed policy paper that he published in august , with the case studies and the reference to advice and support , but the implication of what has been said is that an improvement can be made . on the infected blood compensation authority , i echo my previous comments in welcoming the government ’s pledge to deliver the first payments by the end of the year . i know that the paymaster general and i align in recognising the paramount importance of delivering this compensation as quickly as possible . however , currently , there is no defined timetable for when applications can be made and when payments will be processed . furthermore , i know the paymaster general will find it as troubling as i do that groups of victims have previously described meeting the end - of - year deadline as “ nigh on impossible ” . we need to solve these trust issues . can he outline the steps the government and the ibca are taking to ensure that payments will be made by the end of the year — just 10 weeks away ? can he confirm what proportion of the eligible infected community will receive their payments by the end of the year ? there is a suspicion , of which i am sure the paymaster general is aware , that achieving payouts for the previously mentioned user group of 20 individuals by the end of the year will be used to technically satisfy the obligation he undertook to get money out of the door by the end of the year . the infected community as a whole will want to know that all of them — beyond the 20 — will receive their payments in their bank accounts , and what will be the interval between the end of the year and that happening . please could the paymaster general explain how the user group of 20 people have found the new scheme , and how quickly their lessons can be applied to the rest of the infected community ? i understand that the ibca recently confirmed its intention to invite increasingly larger groups of people to test the service before it opens to those who are eligible . can the paymaster general confirm when the scheme will open to larger groups ? how many will be involved ? will they include all victims , including those affected from the infected estates ? the right hon . gentleman mentioned issues around the burden of proof . i seek clarification on the proof that victims need to provide . it appears that the burden of proof once again falls to victims , which risks going against the letter and spirit of both sir brian langstaff and sir robert francis ’s recommendations . i recognise and am sympathetic to the challenges , given cabinet office officials ’ advice to me when i was in his position . locating medical records could be an issue , given that the latest case date specified in the regulations is more than 30 years ago . can the paymaster general outline the decision - making process of the ibca in circumstances where medical records are apparently unavailable ? what steps is he taking to ensure that rightful compensation is received when proof of infected conditions is not readily available ? i would like to move on to affected persons . in his report in may , sir brian langstaff made it abundantly clear that both infected and affected persons were to be given interim payments as quickly as possible . i am therefore concerned that part 3 of this instrument defines eligible infected persons but not the affected persons . can the minister offer some reassurance to the affected community and confirm that he has not ignored sir brian langstaff ’s recommendation for the affected community ? the affected community are concerned that the government ’s delays in laying the second set of regulations for them means that many elderly parents of infected victims or bereaved partners will not live to see their rightful payouts as affected individuals . i acknowledge the drafting and timetable challenges , but it will be 10 months from the final report this may to the end of next march without any defined regulations or timetable for making a claim as an affected person . that will distress many in the affected community . i am absolutely sure that the paymaster general does not think it is fair for those affected people to feel like second - class citizens , but will he explain what processes will be under way between now and the end of march , and will he look to publish , even in broad outline , a timetable for affected communities ’ applications and the interval before payments will be received ? i am also concerned that no impact assessment has been published for this statutory instrument . parliamentary scrutiny from all sides needs to be balanced , and fairer legislation will ensue if we can have maximum information on impact in advance , so that the evaluation process can be better informed . i know the paymaster general has previously said that the costs of the infected blood scheme will be recognised in next week ’s budget . can he confirm whether the government have calculated the impact and cost of the regulations ? i shall conclude by thanking the paymaster general for his work in this area and his transparency with me . this legislation is very technically challenging and difficult to get right . i have enormous sympathy and respect for him . however , i urge him to ensure that critical information is as readily accessible as possible to all victims , infected and affected alike , bringing as much specificity as possible to the timelines for those different communities to this house as quickly as possible , and outlining the cost of the scheme . for many of these victims , time is of the essence , which is why we must do all we can to deliver justice as quickly and effectively as possible . i remain committed to supporting the government where i possible can and asking questions that are as reasonable as possible where answers still need to be provided . i am really pleased to see these regulations return to the house . although there is still much to do , it marks a significant milestone in ensuring that the government deliver on their promise to work at pace to establish the ibca and give it the necessary powers to start making compensation payments . as hon . members have said , we need to do this to ensure that payments are made as quickly as possible to people who have waited far too long for justice already . i thank the paymaster general for the sense of urgency that has characterised his work to progress this issue to date since returning to government . i know that in that work he will have been mindful of the many stories of injustice from this long - running scandal . my right hon . friend the paymaster general , as my constituency neighbour , will know that my constituents , the smiths , lost their son colin to aids at just seven years old . colin contracted it from infected blood from arkansas prison , aged just 10 months . it emerged during the inquiry that colin ’s doctor knew about the infection risks associated with using imported blood treatments on children , but broke his own nhs department ’s guidelines to do so anyway . not only did the smiths lose their very beloved son , but because of the stigma surrounding hiv at the time , the family were ostracised by the local community , harassed and abused , lost employment , and even had “ aids dead ” written in black paint alongside their house . that is why we are here today . there are so many stories . they illustrate why this is so important . when the final report of the infected blood inquiry was published , i said to the now former minister that the smiths wanted colin to be remembered , and for “ sorry ” to turn into concrete action on compensation , without adding further to the decades of painful delay that so many victims have had to endure . progress is clearly being made . my right hon . friend the paymaster general also knows that there are many questions that come up along the way . a lot of people are getting their information online . i agree that we need more information for affected families such as the smiths . on their behalf , i reiterate that there is still much confusion among the affected community about what the regulations will mean for individual people making compensation claims . there is a bit of a feeling that compensation for bereaved parents is low . it would be really helpful if more could be done to explain how compensation will be calculated . it is also important that the government engage on an ongoing basis with all the many charities who have been involved , as the ibca has done . we should recognise — a point made by my right hon . friend also knows that many of those affected , like the smiths , have waited years for compensation . it is not just about the compensation ; it is also about justice , but both matter . my right hon . friend has announced previously that applications for interim payments to the estates of deceased infected people will open this month . can he confirm when that will be ? could he also set out whether affected parents who are not the beneficiaries of an estate will be eligible for those interim payments ? the smiths also understand that those applications should be processed , and payments made , within 30 days . if my right hon . friend would address that in his closing remarks , it would be great . the scheme , the system and the framework are clearly very complicated , as hon . members have said . we should acknowledge that today and do as much as possible to help people through that process . my right hon . friend talked about the second set of regulations to enable compensation payments to begin for those affected . could he say more about the progress of the work being undertaken to that end , when he expects those regulations to be laid , and when he estimates applications will open ? i think the date of it is vital that once the ibca begins its work , applications are swiftly processed without unnecessary delay . will my right hon . friend talk about the resources available to support that ? my right hon . friend is obviously aware of the vital work of small charities and support groups to support those affected , like the smiths . i echo the point raised by the hon . member for aberdeenshire north and moray east that those groups ’ resources have been hugely stretched . it would be really helpful to know what funding might be available to enable such groups to continue their important work . i thank the minister for his important work so far . i hope that we have future opportunities to keep raising these issues as the process continues , on behalf of those who have waited so very long for this . we need to get it right , but we also need to get it done . rose — there are many valuable contributions still to be made during the course of this debate . i just want to remind members to be mindful , during the debate on the infected blood compensation scheme , that the contaminated blood products group litigation is still before the courts . the resolution relating to matters that are sub judice does not apply when the house is discussing legislation , as we are doing today , but i would none the less invite members to exercise caution and avoid any unnecessary comments on active legal proceedings . i now invite the liberal democrat spokesperson to speak . the liberal democrats are glad to see the introduction of this legislation and the establishment of the infected blood compensation scheme . we are glad that it will move the victims of this atrocity , both those infected and affected , closer to long - overdue justice and compensation . victims and their families have been waiting decades for answers and for recognition of the suffering that they have endured . liberal democrats welcome the findings of sir brian langstaff ’s report , which vindicated so many of those people affected . we voted last december for the amendment to the victims and prisoners bill , requiring the government to set up the compensation scheme , and we are glad that this motion establishes that . this is a deeply sad scandal . does my hon . friend agree that we need reassurance from the minister that there is adequate capacity to process the applications at pace ? i thank my hon . friend for that intervention . it goes very much to the heart of the remarks that i shall make about ensuring that the compensation scheme established through this legislation is indeed adequate , not just in its resources but in its powers to fully address the magnitude of the justice and compensation that is owed to the families who have suffered . although we are grateful that the government have brought this legislation before parliament at such an early stage , we want to ensure that these proposals go far enough , and ensure that all those affected get the justice they deserve . the liberal democrats will work with the government to ensure that the provision for fair and proper compensation is implemented as quickly and effectively as possible . more than 3,000 deaths are attributable to infected blood and blood products , over 30,000 people were infected with hepatitis c or hiv after receiving infected blood transfusions , and many thousands more have been affected by the suffering that has been caused . this scandal is a chilling story of people being failed , not only by the medical professionals who treated them but by the nhs — which should have been responsible for the safety of their treatment — and by a series of governments whose integrity and diligence should have precluded such an atrocity from ever taking place . over the decades when this was happening , children were subject to unsafe and deeply unethical clinical testing . senior doctors in british hospitals administered experimental treatments while knowing the significant risk of contaminated products , and staff in haemophilia centres across the country used blood products even though it was widely known that these products were likely to be infected , as was so vividly highlighted by the scope of the negligence goes far beyond the medical administration ; the infected blood inquiry report reveals a culture of covering up . we must ensure that there is transparency in governance , especially given the disregard with which the last conservative government treated the public ’s trust . the liberal democrats support the survivors ’ call for a duty of candour on all public officials , as well as the introduction of increased legal protections for whistleblowers . we must do all we can to ensure that we have an honest political culture in which concerns are listened to and questions answered , so that nothing of this nature can ever happen again . we are glad that the report has made public the extent to which people were failed , and that there is support across the house for acknowledgement of the injustices that have been suffered , which this legislation begins to rectify . however , while we are grateful for the government ’s action in response to sir brian ’s inquiry , particularly the minister ’s extension of the scheme beyond the initial commitments from the previous government , we are concerned that the legislation does not go far enough . financial compensation can not make up for the years of injustice and the unimaginable distress that so many thousands of people have gone through . the compensation scheme is an important step in acknowledging their suffering , but i urge the minister to see it as the first step in the process of compensating victims . we want to see legislation that compensates the children who , without consent , were tested on with contaminated blood but did not go on to develop a disease . we want to see recognition of the family members who saw loved ones suffer , and in some instances pass away , but who will receive no compensation because they were over the age of 18 at the time of infection . we want to see a clear and explicit explanation of the payment bandings that have been set out , and we want to see engagement with the affected community at all stages . it is vital that the scheme acknowledges the trauma experienced beyond the physical suffering caused by the infected blood . not only were so many lives cut short or destroyed by the hideous physical illnesses that contaminated blood caused , but unimaginable psychological distress has been caused by experimentation on unconsenting and often unaware patients . we urge the government to ensure that this scheme encompasses all those who suffered owing to the infected blood scandal , and that any further legislation is developed with the close engagement of those who best understand that suffering . our principal concerns lie with the transparency of the calculation of compensation payments . it is crucial that the scheme does not establish a hierarchy of suffering , and i ask the minister to outline the process by which these tariffs were decided . the compensation for people treated with infected blood products who “ self - cleared ” hepatitis c is very low , and does not account for the health impacts that they have experienced or the psychological damage that they have experienced . there is also a significant discrepancy between those infected with hepatitis c and those infected with hiv . although we welcome the initiation of compensation payments , we believe that there must be greater transparency over how they have been calculated . we urge the minister to engage with the affected communities , and to ensure that there is clear communication explaining how these decisions have been reached . the complications caused by the decades of defensive cover - up have not only exacerbated the trauma experienced by victims , but affected the estates of those who have died . in the intervening decades , some estates have become contentious and the question of the rightful recipients of compensation has therefore become unclear . in some cases , the compensation could be entailed away from those on whom a person ’s infection or death has had the greatest impact . it is vital for the ibca to have the necessary resources and powers to support victims through the process , to ensure that appropriate compensation is received by all those affected . the burden of the administrative concerns and queries from affected families is currently falling on overstretched charities . has the minister considered the creation of a dedicated unit to deal with inquiries , working alongside the ibca ? we must support the work of these vital organisations — the charities providing support — and engage with them to understand exactly the needs of those affected . the motion sets out the possibility of future legislation , and we hope that the government will follow up this legislation with vital community engagement . we urge them to ensure , as the scheme progresses , that there are mechanisms in place to enable the concerns of charities , organisations and affected individuals to be heard . we are also cautious about the structural limitations of the ibca . given the many years over which the scandal took place , the six - year timeframe of the authority as a legal entity does not seem appropriate . the equivalent scheme set up by the irish government in the 1990s is still active , and it is crucial that the ibca exists for long enough to ensure that the full compensation scheme and associated processes can be carried out effectively . the liberal democrats are glad to see the introduction of this legislation . we welcome the government ’s swift creation of a compensation body , the ibca , to implement the report ’s recommendations and begin payments to the victims of this scandal . it is essential that people begin to receive the compensation that is so long overdue , and it is vital that that is done in the most compassionate and effective way . while we hope that the government will go further in ensuring that the affected community are fully engaged and consulted in this process , the infected blood compensation scheme will allow victims , both infected and affected , to move , at last , towards justice . let me finally take this opportunity to thank emily , eleni , pipsy , claudia , harry and orlando , who are a - level students in my constituency and have been gaining work experience in my office this week . it has been a pleasure to host them , and they have worked very hard in helping me to put my speech together . i have spoken in the house on numerous occasions about this desperately sad scandal , and i have frequently mentioned the number of people who are dying while we seem to have inquiry after inquiry , and ask question after question . the stage that we have reached today is long overdue . the motion goes some way towards allaying my concerns , and the concerns of those who are still suffering as a result of one of the biggest scandals in nhs history . this is a tragic miscarriage of justice that has destroyed the lives of many individuals and families up and down the country . i have the utmost faith in my right hon . friend the paymaster general , and i know that he is aware that many people believe that the proposals before us are incomplete and do not go far enough — hence his announcement that , hopefully , the second tranche of compensation proposals will come to the house before this is the first step taken by a government who have acted within months of taking office , and this legislation is the beginning of justice for those who have suffered for so long . along with , probably , every other member present , i have spoken to many campaigners and many infected or affected victims and families , and my good friend and constituent sean cavens , who was infected with hepatitis c as a baby , has been a great help to me in this regard . however , we still have many concerns , although i repeat that the progress made in the first 100 days of this labour government has been fantastic . there is still confusion about the impact that the scheme will have on individual claimants . there is also concern that there has been a lack of engagement generally in order to understand and act on potential weaknesses in the scheme ; there needs to be far more engagement . i am sure that my hon . friend , or right hon . friend , the paymaster general will take steps to constructively involve the charities and individuals with an interest in this before the core route for compensation has been laid out today , but there are concerns that there is little information on the supplementary routes . my hon . friend , or right hon . friend — i keep demoting him ; i promise i do not mean to do that — will be acutely aware that many suffering from haemophilia believe that they will need to apply through the supplementary route ; i hope that he can give more detail about how that will work in practice . there are further concerns about the amount of compensation and the compensation period for those impacted by the infection and subsequent death of a loved one . also , how were the infected victims who will first get compensation chosen ? there are more than 5,000 registered , so if 20 are compensated before the end of the year , that does seem to be a drop in the ocean . can we have a clear timeline , setting out how many claims the infected blood compensation authority expects to process per month in 2025 ? as was mentioned , one victim of this scandal dies every four days . the hon . gentleman highlights one of two fundamental elements of the issue — and i thank the government for what they are doing , which builds on the work of the previous government . the first element is information for the families and the individuals affected . clearly , the provision of information will affect exactly what the hon . gentleman describes : whether people come forward , and whether the rate of payment is maintained at its current pace . the second issue is alacrity . very often with these things , getting money out quickly matters most , because there is a rate of attrition . without being macabre about this , some of the people affected will die before they get the money , so alacrity is critical in dealing with this kind of challenge . i thank the right hon . gentleman for his intervention . i have covered a number of the issues that he raises , and will cover more as my contribution continues . there are other huge issues of major concern ; that is being relayed to us by the groups and individuals we have been in constant contact with . for example , they believe that the £ 10,000 and £ 15,000 awards for unethical research and testing are far too low . there is no recognition that people with chronic hepatitis c underwent interferon treatment , or of the additional impact that had on their life . there is also concern that hepatitis c payment bandings do not reflect the suffering caused . bereaved parents and children will receive very low compensation payments if they are not a beneficiary of the estate of their bereaved family member . there is no compensation for the loss , psychological impact and suffering caused by exposure to variant creutzfeldt jakob disease . the list is endless . i think my right hon . friend the paymaster general has received a letter from the haemophilia society outlining the vast majority of the issues that it wants to raise . i want to mention the scandal of children being selected for dangerous medical research . children were given the factor concentrates , despite knowledge of the dangers posed . this is very eerie . it is not british - like . it has been described to me as organised child abuse . the sums of money suggested—£15,000 or £ 10,000 — for compensating victims seem paltry given the horrors that abuse caused . we should think about what happened only a few years ago at treloar , a school set up basically for haemophiliacs . we have had institutions up and down this country experimenting on children . that does not sound like the uk , does it ? they have been experimenting on children , unknown to those children and their families . i simply can not get my head around this sinister issue . there needs to be a lot more focus on what happened back in the day when this country , and the great nhs , was experimenting on young kids . it is not just treloar ; it has received a lot of attention , but there were other such institutions up and down the country . we need to get to the bottom of this , and the country and the government need to send a clear message that this experimentation is wholly unacceptable . i know that the government will look into the issue and act on it with the utmost haste . it is absolutely critical that those who have suffered this injustice — this scandal — for so long get the redress that they sorely deserve . as we discuss this scandal , we should not forget those who have suffered , such as my aforementioned constituent sean cavens , who continues to be an inspirational campaigner on the issue , standing up for those who are unable to do so and all those who , tragically , have lost their life . every member speaking in the debate will no doubt mention individuals in their constituency who have been campaigning ; they have done a fantastic job , and good on them . the labour government have taken giant steps to address the scandal . i would like to thank personally , and on behalf of the people i have spoken to , my right hon . friend the paymaster general and his team , and i urge them to consider the many outstanding issues before this matter comes back to the house on i am conscious of your warning about the sub judice rules , madam deputy speaker , as there is ongoing litigation on this issue , but i hope and believe that nothing i say in my brief contribution will in any way overshadow the prerogative of the courts . this has gone on for far , far too many years . i have dealt with two constituents in particular , both of whom came to my constituency surgery to explain to me as their member of parliament what they had gone through and how it had affected them — and it clearly had , in both cases . i hope the house will forgive me if i judge that it is not right to go through their cases in detail , but they were both extremely polite and eminently reasonable in what they were asking for , and both were deeply frustrated by how long the process had taken . i will send them both a copy of the government ’s regulations and , because they are rather complicated , a copy of the explanatory notes , which i hope they will find to be of as much use as i have . as result of this afternoon ’s proceedings , i hope not just that they will be able to achieve some financial redress , to which i am certain they are absolutely morally entitled , but that they will be able to achieve some peace of mind , because it is very clear to me that both those people ’s lives have been materially affected by the issue . one of them said to me , “ it ’s not about the money . i just want to be able to bring this to a close . ” i hope that the house will understand that sentiment . if hon . members had heard it in the way i heard it face to face , i am sure they would have been as convinced as i was . i want to say a few brief thank yous , because , as we all know , this has been a very long and complex journey — not just for those who were affected by the scandal , but for those who have had to deal with the consequences many years later . this was not the national health service ’s finest hour , and it took a great deal of campaigning by many people to get the system to put its hand up and admit that something had gone wrong — in fact , dreadfully wrong . had it not been for the persistence of some of those individuals , we would not be having this debate this afternoon . however , someone had to deal with the consequences . i pay tribute to two brilliant public servants : sir brian langstaff and sir robert francis — there were others — who have both , in their own way , had to attempt to exercise what one might call the judgment of solomon in dealing with this extremely detailed and complex issue . they have both done their country a service . i also commend my right hon . friend my last thank you goes to the current paymaster general , who is clearly trying to achieve a resolution as speedily as possible and who has dealt with this issue in a very empathetic manner this afternoon . i speak for two constituents , but i am sure that we all have constituents who have been affected by the scandal , and many people across the country will be grateful for the way in which he is evidently attempting to handle it . i wish him godspeed in all his endeavours . this went on for too long and affected too many people but , hopefully , at last , we can collectively begin to put this right and give those people not just redress , but some sort of peace of mind . i know that a few members who were not here for the opening speeches have just turned up . if they can make their way to the chair , i can have a conversation with them about contributing to the debate . i am grateful for all the work that my right hon . friend the paymaster general and this labour government have done to move quickly , and to deliver on their commitment to provide compensation to both the infected and affected . today , we have an opportunity to support the first of those payments being made . as we have heard from other members , the infected blood inquiry revealed systemic failures that led to 30,000 patients being infected , and more than 3,000 people have died as a result of those infections . one of these was jane fitzgerald , the mother of my constituent ronan fitzgerald , who is in the gallery today . i want to put on the official record the horror that jane , her family and other victims have suffered . in 1978 , when jane was 17 years old , she had an ectopic pregnancy and was diagnosed with anaemia . her gp advised her to have a small blood transfusion to make her feel better , and jane was given just one unit of blood at the royal victoria hospital in boscombe . it was not until more than two decades later that she discovered , at the age of 42 , that she had been infected with hepatitis c. jane and her family sought treatment , but by the time she was able to find a suitable option , her cirrhosis was too advanced . her infection caused untold physical and emotional damage , and subjected her to numerous indignities , including the stigma related to her condition . jane was told on at least two occasions that she was clear of the disease , only to find that her condition had actually worsened . her condition caused fluids to collect in her abdomen , legs and feet , which required regular draining , and she often spent hours waiting for hospital treatment when there were no beds or equipment to treat her . on one occasion , her stomach split open while she was waiting for treatment , but she was sent home because the hospital did not have the drainage equipment . eventually , the toxins in her liver carried cancerous cells to her lungs and brainstem . jane died in 2015 , at the age of 54 . jane was taken away from her family in the worst possible way , and they suffer the consequences every day . ronan has spoken candidly about the irreversible impact that losing his mother has had on him , and being powerless to prevent her untimely death has affected his mental health and caused him debilitating physical illness . ronan is a british army veteran and served in the royal corps of signals , but he was left unable to climb a flight of stairs or even leave bed ; he was bed - bound for long periods at the age of just 29 . in his mother ’s final moments , ronan made a vow that he would continue to fight for justice for her , and for all the families affected . thousands more are living with illness and fear , in full knowledge that , even now , somebody dies every three and a half days . when i first met ronan , he asked me whether i would be willing to stand up in the house of commons to speak up for his mother , and for all the other people who have been infected and affected . he has been a stalwart campaigner for the affected children and has strived to ensure that their voices , and the impact of this scandal on their lives , are accounted for . he now co - chairs the support group tainted blood - affected siblings and children , representing 400 members . although he is grateful for the progress that has been made , he has asked me to share his concerns and to be his voice . the community of affected children have called for the removal of the discriminatory age restrictions that are placed on siblings over the age of 18 who did not live at the same address as their infected loved ones at the point of infection ; for affected children and siblings to not be excluded from any heads of loss ; and for all infected and affected persons to have equal access to supplementary routes across all heads of loss , whereby they may provide further evidence of their individual circumstances to ensure that compensation reflects the severe impact of this travesty on their lives . further , payment to estates should be given the same priority as payments to living infected persons . any process that delays these payments creates the high probability that some elderly affected members might die before the payments are made , given the time taken to process them . currently , the government have no safeguards or protections in place should that happen , whereas protections are offered to those living with infections who die before their payments are made . families have been waiting too long for justice , and they now run the risk of missing out on this justice and the compensation they deserve . the infected blood inquiry report confirmed that jane was a victim of medical malpractice through the single unit of non - lifesaving blood she was given , and this was covered up for decades . today is an important day on the long road to justice traversed by families affected by the infected blood scandal , and i pay tribute to the victims and all the campaigners who have fought so hard . i am grateful that the infected blood compensation authority has agreed to meet the affected children and siblings . in the spirit of test and learn , may i urge the government to ensure that all efforts are made to deliver justice to the community and to take their voices into account at all stages of the process ? my very first contribution in this place was to raise the issue of the infected blood scandal and its impact on siblings . i raised it in a question , as it had been raised with me directly while canvassing during the general election campaign , and i am glad that we have the opportunity now to raise those issues again in this debate . we on the liberal democrat benches absolutely welcome the opportunity to recognise the victims of this historic failure . the tragedy of history is that we can not change it , but at least the house now has the opportunity to give victims and their families the recognition and recourse that they have been stripped of for far too long , by learning lessons from this terrible episode and ensuring that history is not repeated . the administration of high - risk blood transfusions to vulnerable children and adults , carried out by the very medical professionals their families trusted , stands out as one of the most shocking miscarriages of justice in healthcare in our lifetimes . the infected blood scandal has left behind a wake of mourning families forever changed by the loss of their loved ones . today i share the concerns of just one of those thousands of families . a constituent of mine who lost a sibling to the scandal wrote to me recently to say that he is deeply worried that his 87 - year - old mother may not live to witness justice being served through the government ’s compensation scheme . i echo no amount of money can ever make up for the grief , but it is our responsibility in this chamber to ensure that the british state recognises and begins to tackle historical injustices such as this one with a comprehensive scheme . to ensure that the scheme does that properly , the government must also ensure full transparency over its progress and open ongoing communications with all those affected . further administrative delays will undermine this vital work , and that can not be allowed to happen . i am reassured to hear about the work being done to expedite the claims and to hear the dates for the opening and the first phase of the scheme . the scheme is not just a financial obligation but a moral imperative . we owe it to the victims and their families to act decisively and transparently . justice can not be delayed . when the story of this scandal is told , let today be the first page of the final chapter in which we right a historic wrong , take stock of what it has taught us about the failures of our system and provide , at long last , some level of closure for victims and their families . i thank the minister again for his work on this issue , and encourage him to continue to refine and develop the scheme to ensure that no one affected or infected is left out or left waiting for justice . first , i want to express my gratitude to members of the house who have elected me as the designated chair of the all - party parliamentary group on haemophilia and contaminated blood . i say “ designated ” because we are lacking a conservative officer in the group , so we can not register it in the normal way — i would be delighted to volunteer to fill that gap for the hon . gentleman . the right hon . gentleman would be most welcome , and i will pass on that information . i was hoping to tease someone out by saying that ! it is an honour and a challenge to follow on from the excellent leadership of my right hon . friend and colleague , i welcome the progress that the government are making and i welcome today ’s regulations . for many , however , the victories that were celebrated when sir brian langstaff made his final report and sir robert francis was appointed to lead the infected blood compensation authority , were , rather than the beginning of the end , mere milestones on a path with many miles still to go . the fear among many campaigners is that the cabinet office , which was responsible for delay and obfuscation over decades , is now back in charge of the compensation scheme . i know that the minister is earnest in his wish to see the victims of this scandal given the justice they deserve , and that he understands that we are where we are because the campaigners refused to be silenced . they took on the establishment and won , and my right hon . friend the member for kingston upon hull north and cottingham and i cheered them on and promised to deliver for them without equivocation should we get into government . there has been progress , and we welcome today ’s regulations , but for too many the euphoria has been replaced by frustration , leading to anger and a growing fear of betrayal . that stems from the fact that the campaigners feel that they are excluded from the process they brought into being . decisions that they insisted should not be made without them are being made without the openness and candour the government are legislating for . the government have an excellent opportunity , ahead of that legislation , to show what candour means in public office . that is particularly true of how the tariff has been arrived at . for the campaigners , it is like they have won the war , only to see those they vanquished put in charge of delivering the peace . there is growing unease that this is leading to the same tactics as before : delays , lack of information about how decisions are arrived at and lack of communication from the cabinet office . that lack of communication is causing people to look to small charitable organisations for advice , as they struggle to understand the complex compensation process . will ministers commit to providing support to those organisations , so that they can continue that work , as was recommended by sir brian langstaff ? i understand that the infected blood compensation authority is starting to engage with the haemophilia society and campaigning groups about the process and technical matters , but there is an urgent need for much more engagement than has happened thus far . we are told that the infected blood compensation authority intends to settle 20 cases by the end of the year . why only 20 ? how will they be selected ? the victims call these the willy wonka golden tickets . in the meantime , while these 20 cases are completed , another 14 people are likely to die — one victim dies on average every four days . justice delayed is justice denied . when sir brian langstaff published his interim report in april 2023 , he appealed to the government to get on with the compensation scheme , because he was alarmed that so many people were dying without receiving the justice they deserved . that makes it imperative that people , whether infected or affected , receive the interim payments without delay . regulations for those affected by the scandal will not be published until march 2025 — yet another year on from sir brian ’s final report . yet again , justice is delayed ; yet again , victims will die without receiving compensation . these are people who have suffered unspeakable harm : bereaved parents who lost children ; bereaved children who lost parents and suffered bullying ; bereaved partners who could not have families or who were advised to abort babies for fear they may have hiv ; siblings who were bullied ; and siblings who , under the tariff , are currently ruled out because they were over 18 . there is so much more . it is not possible to deal with these cases without understanding each individual ’s circumstances and the suffering they endured through so many years . what is needed is a bespoke system that meets individuals ’ needs , but that requires far more engagement than is currently happening . the lack of engagement with victims is leading to a lack of understanding about how decisions are reached and how compensation is calculated , fuelling mistrust in the process . many victims , whether affected or infected , have lost their faith that the full extent of their suffering will be recognised through the compensation scheme . indeed , some campaigners have concluded that their suffering will not be recognised through the compensation scheme and that they must return to court to get the compensation they deserve . those suffering from hep c do not understand why their experiences mean they receive different treatment from those with hiv . that requires urgent explanation . again , the scale of the suffering needs to be looked at case by case , and there needs to be greater engagement , so that both sides understand the concerns . why are people with hep c being offered much lower rates of compensation unless they are near death ? similarly , the additional payments for those experimented on , of £ 10,000 or £ 15,000 , have been met with widespread derision . my constituent , mr lee moorey , was a pupil at treloar school . having read his testimony to the inquiry , i share his sentiments . will the minister guarantee that that will be looked at ? we need to remind ourselves of the scale of the scandal and just how many people have died without justice . all along , people have had to fight to get justice , but they will only believe in justice if they have faith in the process . that requires the decisions to be made about them to be made with them . we have to restore their faith in the process . i understand that sir brian langstaff has kept his inquiry open so that he can keep a watching brief . it would be a shame if the chancellor , the paymaster general or even the prime minister found themselves summoned before him . finally , my right hon . friend promised that there will be a full debate in government time on the scandal . when will that take place ? i call the spokesperson for the scottish national party . it is a pleasure to follow i also pay tribute to i am happy to say , with a great deal of satisfaction , that we have made significant progress . we are at the point of being able to deliver the scheme , and we will start to see payments to those who have needed support and compensation so badly throughout all these decades . my only slight criticism of the right hon . member for salisbury is that it is a pity that we did not get the opportunity to debate the issue in the last parliament . there was an unsatisfactory statement from the former prime minister , who then just disappeared . there was no real opportunity to ask questions properly . i know he made an effort to address some of the concerns , but it would have been good to hear more at that point about how the schemes were being taken forward . the general election created a massive gap , after all the energy and activity that had been summoned up to resolve the issue , but we are where we are . the final report by the infected blood inquiry was a fantastic piece of work . i pay tribute to everybody involved in it . they went about their jobs diligently and comprehensively , and we ended up with a wide - ranging report that shed a dramatic light on all the things that had gone wrong . it paved the way to create a positive way forward that is now beginning to deliver . we must remember why we are here : thousands of people were caught up in probably the worst health scandal this country has ever endured . it is a failure of the british state that we ended up in a situation where people , through no fault of their own , contracted hiv , hepatitis b and hepatitis c. when those who were caring for them raised concerns , they were constantly ignored and told , “ there ’s nothing to see here . ” the inquiry was unequivocal that a compensation scheme must be set up immediately . the regulations we are debating today are essential for delivering that compensation scheme as quickly and effectively as possible . i have been supporting victims of the infected blood scandal for about 20 years , since it was first brought to my attention by a constituent , who died about 10 years ago and is no longer with us . i remember the frustrations of those early years when i was constantly writing on behalf of this constituent just to be stonewalled — to be told that there was nothing to see and nothing further to be considered . it was that reluctance to take these issues seriously that defined those early years . i said to the former minister , the right hon . member for salisbury , that i hoped we would get some sort of separate investigation into why members of parliament were consistently deceived and — i shall say this — lied to by people working in the department of health . we were constantly writing letters on behalf of our constituents , and the replies were clearly rubbish . as a recipient of several of those letters from ministers , i want to know why i was deceived in the way that i was . i pay tribute to andy burnham : he recognised this and he actually signed many of those letters as the former health secretary . i want to know how this came to his desk and why he actually did this . the key thing is , as other members have said , that the groups that are representing the community are properly listened to and are engaged in the construction of the regulations . it is too late for the regulations we are debating , but when it comes to the affected , the representative groups have to be central to the design of the new regulations . i say that because they have real life experience of this matter . they know what the issues are . they have fought for decades to get to this stage to secure this justice and compensation . i know that there is frustration . i saw the minister screwing his face in response to the hon . member for eltham and chislehurst , but those groups do feel frustrated . they feel that they are being ignored , that their concerns are not being taken seriously , and that they are getting generic general replies from the minister instead of detailed , proper responses to their issues . rose — i will give way to the minister if he will explain to me exactly why that is happening . i just want to say that the hon . member should read nothing into that facial expression . when i close this debate , i shall talk in detail about the consultation that has taken place . that includes the extensive consultation that sir robert francis undertook during the election campaign — the period between me and the right hon . member for salisbury being in office . that was hugely important . the government have listened and have made significant changes to the scheme . it is not about giving generic replies , as the hon . member has suggested . the government will continue to move extremely carefully and listen to concerns , and the infected blood compensation authority will do the same . i am to grateful to the minister for his response . i look forward to his summing up , as i know that he will sincerely try to address these matters , but i say to him that all i am doing is reflecting the concerns that i have heard from the groups that i have worked with so closely over the years . there is a sense that they are not being taken all that seriously and that they are not getting the responses and the information that they think are important . the minister mentioned sir robert francis . there has been nothing other than glowing praise for the way that sir robert has carried out his business . i know that he had a useful and productive meeting with representatives of haemophilia scotland where everything was aired and properly discussed . there is absolutely no complaint from anybody in this house about the way that sir robert francis has gone about his business . he has been up and down the country listening to the groups . but there are certain things that only the minister can respond to , particularly when it comes to policy decisions . that is why i encourage him to hold a debate on them . he has said that he is prepared to do so , which i am grateful for , and that he has perhaps been misunderstood . the community must be given the information and advice that they require . there are a couple of matters that i hope the minister will address in his closing remarks . i will not repeat some of the points that have already been raised , as i know he has taken a note of them . sir robert francis proposed an additional autonomy award under the supplementary route for those who had been subjected to the unethical treatment and experiments that have been described . although that is welcome , it is not clear how the figures have been arrived at , so i would like a little more clarity on that . how have these figures been calculated ? one issue that possibly has not been raised today is those with hepatitis c who were treated with interferon . early treatment methods for the eradication of hepatitis c had many negative side effects , which were extremely difficult to go through and had a lasting effect on those treated . is that a group that the minister will consider ? the future operation of support schemes is also important . the decision to continue existing support scheme payments for life for those who were registered with a scheme before sir robert ’s report said : “ the benefits offered by the scheme to eligible recipients for financial and other support services should be no less than those offered by any of the current support schemes . ” i want to know whether that is still the government ’s position . it is also assumed , based on sir robert ’s recommendation , that all the benefits of the support schemes will continue . it would be good if the government could confirm their position at an early date so that individuals have clarity on their future entitlements . under the regulations , the minister has the power to make arrangements for the provision of support and assistance to applicants or potential applicants for compensation under the infected blood compensation scheme . sir robert francis has identified three groups to which the minister might usefully apply that prerogative : ibca - funded legal representation , ibca - funded financial support from an independent financial adviser and ibca - funded legal support to executors of estates where there are complex matters to resolve in determining entitlements and access to an independent mediation service . my hon . friend we are looking forward to the next round , and it is important that we go forward . i have queries , which i know the minister will probably address , about why only 20 people have been contacted , as the hon . member for eltham and chislehurst mentioned . i have no idea why it is only 20 , so perhaps the minister can tell us a little more about the rationale . it is right that the system be tested to see whether it is robust before it is opened to a wider community , but he has to say a little more about why it is those 20 . i am not having a go at the minister , who i think is doing a good job ; i am here to congratulate him and encourage him ever so gently to get moving just that little bit faster . we have had decades of obfuscation , a lack of progress , and people dying as they waited for compensation . this matter now sits on the minister ’s shoulders . we will be watching him and keeping an eye on it . i know that there will be regular updates to the house . believe me , we will all be here to ensure that he is doing the right thing by the victims . i congratulate the minister on the way he spoke to the house . he spoke firmly , with a sense of urgency and great clarity in his use of english , which was very much appreciated . the truth of the matter is that there is a deeply ingrained scepticism in the community we are talking about . words , in the end , will not count ; actions will . of course , today we are taking significant action on the road . when we reflect on the views of victims and their relatives , it is hardly surprising that there has been a breakdown in trust . it always seems to be the case that the british establishment ’s first reaction when there is a disaster is to close ranks , deny the truth and not listen to the victims . it is only in recent times that victims ’ voices have begun to be heard . with disasters such as the post office scandal , the policing of the miners ’ strike or hillsborough , the establishment always closed ranks . the langstaff report is very clear . first , it says — this goes to the root of the scepticism that people feel — that , from the 1940s , governments of different parties were fully aware of the scientific opinion that these actions could infect recipients of blood transfusions . sir brian langstaff says that the disaster did not happen by accident . he tries to imagine what it must be like for those suffering the agony of being victims , and then being refused the truth that a wrong had been done by successive governments . my constituent katie has been in touch with my office . her dad died in the 1980s when she was an infant . imagine living life with a cloud upon you after losing your father when young , because of negligence by operatives of the state and the cover - up that followed . the only way we can reduce the scepticism is for the payments to begin to flow through . in the meantime , there is clearly a wish for some reassurance from the minister today . he has made some of these points already , but i will go back to them . first , someone who lost her father in the ’ 80s when she was two will probably struggle to find the appropriate evidence , as she is not necessarily skilled enough to search for it forensically . langstaff discovered — this is shocking — that documents were destroyed knowingly by the government of the day because they thought that it might incriminate them . it was an establishment cover - up of some scale . how can victims establish that they deserve justice if documents have been lost or even wilfully destroyed ? the minister mentioned that , but we need to hear more from him about it either today or in the coming period . secondly , as other members have said , civil society groups have the confidence of the victims — the haemophilia society is one , but my constituent mentioned tainted blood , of which the minister is probably aware . it would be helpful if the minister said that he and the government are open to further conversations with civil society groups , which can speak on behalf of victims . it is important that the victims ’ voices are heard , and because those groups have the confidence of victims , those exchanges and that dialogue would be very helpful . the minister referred to one of the central requests that have been made . we are dealing with people who do not necessarily have large resources to employ representatives such as lawyers and other advisers . the minister indicated that the government are open to victims having their own representatives . however , if the government are to encourage the appointment of such representatives , it must be clear that they are not appointees of the government ; they must see themselves as representatives of the victims . otherwise , people will not have the necessary trust in them . that brings me to my final point . i can imagine the kinds of conversation that the civil service has had with ministers about this matter over decades : “ minister , you may be dealing with billions of pounds . you have a duty to ensure that every single penny is properly spent , so please exercise care in any announcements you make . ” i imagine that those conversations happen on most days . of course we have a duty to protect money , and very significant amounts will have to be spent to compensate people properly , but equally there is a duty to deliver justice to the people who were treated by state actors in a shabby and disgraceful way over decades . when there is a lack of paperwork and victims are perhaps very ill or dying , how will we secure value for money for the taxpayer while delivering justice for people who have struggled for decades as a result of government negligence ? i leave those thoughts with the minister and hope that he will address them in his reply . like other members , i hope that as the scheme is rolled out and we establish confidence among the victims , the government will organise opportunities for the minister to come back to the house so that we can raise constituents ’ questions and establish a more trusting relationship between the government , who are doing dramatic work on this matter , and the people who have suffered for decades . hon . members on both sides of the house have made many fine contributions , some of which have been very detailed . you will be pleased to know , madam deputy speaker , that mine will hopefully be quite simple . there are two words that i would like everybody to consider : urgency and trust . those were the words that summarised the feelings of my burgess hill constituent graham knight when i spoke to him recently . graham is not sure precisely when he was infected , but he thinks it was probably in 1987 while he was having his appendix removed . it was not until 2002 that he was finally diagnosed with hepatitis c. he told me that every day he has woken up since then has been a bonus . needless to say , there has been a vast impact not only on his health , but on his professional life , his personal life and relationships and his social life . in 2003 , graham lost his business ; the next year , as a consequence , all the family savings were gone . there has been an enormous impact on graham ’s marriage to sue . graham and sue are fearless , determined , strong people . he told me that before he became poorly they had two to three good years of happy , healthy marriage ; i am pleased to say that they are still happily married , but graham ’s hepatitis c has had a profound impact on them in the years since . graham said that sue did not deserve that in her marriage , but she has been steadfast and loyal throughout . graham also has high praise for the team who have cared for him at guy ’s and st thomas ’ hospitals : the care he has received has been incredible . graham ’s asks are about urgency . he says that there has been a profound loss of trust among the infected blood community , and that nothing — nothing — will restore that trust until the payments are forthcoming . victims need certainty , because they can not plan for the future . trust and urgency were certainly raised by my constituent john , who emailed me recently following a meeting between legal representatives and members of the ibca team to get an update . he said that “ big and elaborate apologies are not what is needed , it is what was promised regarding compensation settlements that we want to see actioned without further delays . ” it is clear that my hon . friend agrees , but i would like to hear her response . i do agree . my hon . friend is right that ensuring that compensation comes forward is of the utmost importance . i am sure it will be coming forward , but the urgency with which it does so is the key point here . i end by emphasising the anguish that graham and countless other victims still hold and carry with them every day . it is deep - seated , and it will not go away until the matter is settled and the payments are concluded . urgency is now required to right this 40 - year wrong . i call katie white to make her maiden speech . it is an honour to make my maiden speech , particularly on this critically important debate on the infected blood scandal . i ask the house to allow me a temporary shift in tone , so that i can celebrate the community that sent me here . like many hon . members ’ constituencies , the constituency i have the privilege to represent , leeds north west , is a new seat with a long history . i am sure most members know where leeds is , but i describe it as being right at the heart of the uk . i am deeply grateful to the thousands of voters who have put their trust in me , and as i said on election night , regardless of how they voted , i am determined to represent and serve our community in this place . i begin by paying tribute to my immediate predecessors , both of whom are still members of this house . i thank leeds north west has an incredible history . the stunning norman church in adel dates back to the 12th century ; it is where my parents were married , where i was christened , and where my grandfather lies at rest . further west is otley chevin . members may not yet have had the chance to visit otley chevin , but we would not be here without it . the stone from the chevin provided the foundations for this very parliament when it was rebuilt in the 1840s . it should not be a surprise that it is yorkshire that keeps this house grounded . in leeds north west , our feet are always planted firmly on that bedrock , but our eyes remain on the horizon , ready to embrace the future . our constituency is a vibrant hub of entrepreneurship and creativity , a legacy that continues to thrive today . abraham moon in guiseley , a fabric company established in 1837 , still supplies international fashion houses today , while emis — which began in the 1980s in horsforth — now flourishes in beautiful rawdon as the leading provider of data support to the nhs . we are home to west yorkshire ’s only airport , leeds bradford , and i was pleased to meet with jet2 ’s chief executive officer steve just this week to discuss how the aviation sector can innovate to decarbonise . should members wish to stop for a bite to eat , they should look no further than the thriving bars and restaurants of vibrant horsforth . it is a constituency bursting with joyful community fairs and fetes , from guiseley festival to yeadon carnival and from rawdon summer gala to the arthington and bramhope shows — that last one comes complete with a human fruit machine . there is no stronger pride than yorkshire pride , and our community spirit is a great source of strength . however , as in many places , people are feeling overwhelmed and concerned about their future and that of their children and grandchildren . many of the people i have met on the doorstep also feel let down — let down by politicians and by the institutions they have put their trust in over decades . the infected blood scandal is the most extreme and harrowing example of such systematic failure : people placed their trust in doctors and the government to protect them , and that trust was betrayed . i am proud that this government and this prime minister will introduce a duty of candour law to prevent future cover - ups like the infected blood and post office scandals . i also share deep concerns about the other great challenges facing our community . mental health figures are horrifying . the global mind project has revealed that the uk has the highest rate of mental distress in the world and ranks second worst in overall mental health . people are working harder , yet getting unhealthier and unhappier , and of course , the climate and nature crisis looms . we need things to change ; the country voted for change , and it is change that propelled me into politics . my journey began with the climate crisis . we know that if we get it wrong , we face disaster — particularly for the most vulnerable among us — but if we get it right , we unlock enormous opportunities for our society . in 2003 , i joined the local leeds branch of friends of the earth and launched a campaign for the uk ’s first climate change bill . everyone told me that it was impossible ; that it was too ambitious and too radical . there was no way that the treasury would ever allow a carbon budget — but , friends , they did . we turned that campaign into the fourth most supported campaign in parliament ’s history , with cross - party backing from members across the house . the last labour government turned that bill into an act in 2008 , under my right hon . friend why am i sharing this ? it is because politics must be about real change or it is about nothing . i want to serve our community , and improve our schools , healthcare and public services . when i think about change , i think about my grandmother , marjorie simms . she challenged the status quo . she lived in horsforth in the1950s . there were not that many women driving then , but marjorie did . there were not that many women wearing trousers , but marjorie did . marjorie developed breast cancer , and most parents in the 1950s avoided talking to their children , but marjorie showed them her mastectomy so they could understand . she died at 43 , the age i entered parliament . marjorie did things differently and her spirit lives on in me . we have seen too much promise and too little delivery in recent years — endless debates about challenges , but a lack of energy for real solutions . politics should be about action , not just words . the seeds of change can be seen within our communities . as a government , our role is to water them and create the conditions for them to flourish . leeds north west is willing to play its role in full . we have the leaders , we have the ideas and we have the “ get stuff done ” attitude that personifies yorkshire — like the students i met recently at ralph thoresby and green meadows or the cadets in my constituency , who are ambitious about the difference we can make ; like the horsforth shed set up a couple of years ago by ex - teachers based on the national men ’s shed model and supporting male mental health , but expanded to include many other vulnerable members of the community ; like those from otley 2030 who decided they wanted to be a beacon of hope and created a living laboratory in the town to create climate friendly and sustainable solutions where people and nature thrive ; and like brian who , after a death in morrisons car park in guiseley , set up defibrillators all over the community so that lifesaving equipment is on hand and there is a network of community activists servicing them . let us not forget the gold medal olympians in our community — the brownlee brothers and the cyclist tom pidcock — who inspire us all with their dedication and achievements . we are indeed a hotbed of world - class talent . people in leeds north west do not wait for change to come to them ; they make it happen . they are the doers and the problem solvers , and i will play my role in that same way . i will champion the green agenda by focusing on practical solutions that carve a british path towards a successful green transition . we will leverage our strengths , whether it is world - leading research , supporting our best business minds , or unlocking the public and private investment needed to turbocharge a green economy . i will support the health of our community — mental health , physical health , community health — and i want to support our entrepreneurs and creativity to grow our region . i promise to be a ferocious champion for my community , my beloved yorkshire and our country , and i will do it with joy . it may recently have become more fashionable across the pond , but i have been measuring with joy for years , and there is always space for a little more joy . finally , i promise to listen , learn and reflect . no one has all the answers , but all of us have some of them . i commit to working constructively and collectively . i will endeavour to arrive with curiosity and non - judgment , because if we want to change the way we do things , we must start in this moment , in this place and with these actions . having been a student at leeds , i look forward to an invitation . i congratulate i thank the minister for bringing this motion before the house . as my hon . friend i am here to put on the record the story of my constituent philip , who , after 50 years , told me that he wanted his story to be shared publicly for the first time . i met his wife on the doorstep when i was canvassing for the general election , and she asked me whether , if i won the seat , i would raise the issue of the infected blood scandal when i arrived in this house . philip was diagnosed with haemophilia b at the age of 11 . he said that by the late 1970s , he was probably infected via contaminated blood products , although he was not diagnosed with hep c until the late 1980s . although very ill , he had a demanding job and a young family , so he kept working . philip said : “ the illness and the subsequent aggressive treatment with the then experimental drug interferon was only half the issue for haemophiliacs like me . the world was scared of aids and other viral infections and the press and politicians at the time made it worse with doomsday advertising ‘ do n’t die of ignorance ’ . in hindsight this slogan was a cruel irony as we only found out 30 years later that our ignorance was engineered by those in power . as a haemophiliac i could not discuss or disclose my condition . my boss at the time would not shake my hand or consume food or drink i had prepared . i eventually moved jobs to get away from the ignorance . i continued to keep knowledge of my haemophilia to close family and friends . ” philip eventually left his job because of fatigue caused by the hep c infection , and even at that point in 2008 , he was not able to give the true reasons for leaving to his employer . he said : “ as an infected person , this has had a physical and mental impact on me for decades . the impact of the delays to the compensation scheme on me , my wife and two children as affected people continues . as a community we have waited over 35 years for recognition , compensation and closure . during that time over 3,000 haemophiliacs have died and more continue to die every week without knowing their families are secure . i consider myself to be one of the lucky ones that has survived , but why are we continually subjected to more stress caused by government deadlines that pass and communications updates that say the same as the last one ? the payment schemes are already detailed , so why is there any further delay ? the latest delay is whilst the ibca test the compensation framework on a small group to check it works . do the government have any idea how this makes infected people feel ? some of us are guinea pigs all over again . ” i have used philip ’s words because they are much stronger than anything that i could say on this subject . although i welcome the minister ’s statement and am pleased to hear that some payments have begun , i urge him to ensure that progress is swift and that those who have been affected by the scandal will also receive compensation swifty . we have heard a lot from hon . members about siblings and the children of people who were infected . applications must also open for the estates of those who have sadly not survived long enough to outlive this process , which should have been resolved many years ago . we have talked a lot this afternoon about the feeling of shame that this terrible tragedy happened in the first place . i add my voice to those of others in the house urging swift compensation not only for everybody who has been infected by this scandal , but for affected families , including siblings of loved ones who have died . as my hon . friend there have been many stories told of infected blood in this debate , including from my hon . friend i come to the chamber to give the account of my constituent , brian , and his late mother , roberta wilson murray . in the mid-1980s , roberta entered hospital to receive treatment for an ulcer in her stomach . complications in that procedure meant that she required a blood transfusion , and on 13 and for 35 years , roberta ’s health was plagued by a virus that for more than half of that time she did not even know she had contracted . when she did find out , as in other cases that members have spoken about , she lived with great stigma in work and in her social life . the truth is that the state failed roberta , and not just in 1985 but at every single step of the way since . the scandal of infected blood transfused into patients is , as we have heard in this debate , one of the greatest injustices of our time . for more than half a century , tens of thousands of people , including my late constituent , have suffered . they were let down by the very institutions that we are supposed to trust and rely upon most . nobody would think that in an nhs hospital the treatment that someone was receiving would be a death sentence , but that is what it was for many people . as is so often the case with such scandals , the initial injustice was worsened by the cover - up and obstruction of truth that followed . whether it is infected blood , the post office scandal more recently or the collapse of a stadium , these injustices must never be allowed to happen again . it is one of the core duties of a member of parliament to identify and expose failures in state bureaucracy . that is why it is so important that this government will bring forward a legal duty of public candour . the pain and injustice that these acts have fostered must never be allowed to happen again , but the truth is that for families such as brian ’s , the damage has already been done . there is ultimately nothing we can do to fully compensate them for the pain and trauma they have endured , but we all owe it to the thousands impacted to make sure that the compensation process is swift , transparent and fair . i am pleased that the government have made it a priority to get this compensation scheme under way , and it is critical that these measures can pass through parliament quickly . there can be no more delay . in that spirit , i ask the minister to write to me to give an indication of when my constituent and his family can expect to see the compensation they are owed . the murray family , like everyone else impacted by this horrendous injustice , deserve nothing less . i thank all members for their moving contributions , especially those who have advocated for constituents impacted by this terrible injustice and shared their stories . i welcome the pledge to deliver this important payment scheme swiftly . however , i urge the minister to look at the losses of those family members who provided care . in many cases , including that of my constituent debra , who cared for many years for her husband barrie , bereaved partners and family carers gave up careers , sacrificing pensions and facing many additional costs . concerns about the care award have been expressed by organisations such as tainted blood , which was mentioned earlier . a just care award must take all those factors into account . will the minister ensure fair care costs for the bereaved ? we have heard some incredibly eloquent , moving and substantial speeches today , and i pay tribute to all of them . i also congratulate my hon . friend in my first few months as the member for welwyn hatfield , nothing has left a greater mark on me than meeting mike and diana blake . the blake family are victims of the contaminated blood scandal who have been fighting for justice with grace and determination for nearly four decades . as i told the house in july , stuart blake , their son , was infected with contaminated blood in 1985 , when he was just six years old . stuart was infected with hiv and hepatitis c. he suffered throughout his childhood and passed away in 2006 , aged just 27 . stuart was infected two years before i was born , but 39 years later his parents are still waiting for compensation . the agonising story of the blake family will be all too familiar to hon . members across the house who , as we have heard today , represent constituents who have suffered tragic loss and then seen the state close ranks about the depth of the crisis . as sir brian langstaff concludes in his infected blood inquiry : “ a lack of openness , transparency and candour , shown by the nhs and government , such that the truth has been hidden for decades . ” those of us who sit on these benches today can never undo the suffering , but we can speak the truth about the experience of our constituents and demand that long - overdue compensation flows to their families . in that spirit , i commend my right hon . friend the minister for the decisive action he has taken since assuming office and echo his recent comments on compensation , when he said “ it means nothing if people do n’t get their compensation quickly and efficiently . ” i welcome the news that he expects payments to begin to be made by the end of the year , but echo the calls made on all sides of the house that those who are affected , not just infected , receive their payments as soon as possible . i would also be grateful for some further clarification on how the infected blood compensation authority will work with individuals and families to help them navigate the system . specifically , i want to put on record my request that mike and diana blake are assigned a dedicated case worker , a single point of contact to guide them through the application for compensation and ensure that , after all the years of turmoil , they finally receive what they are owed . earlier this year , the prime minister said that as a society we had collectively failed to protect some of our most vulnerable people . he was absolutely right . the state failed thousands of families for decades , and whether they were infected or affected , the duration of their suffering is unimaginable . we can not ever put it right , but this government will have my support in doing everything in their power to offer compensation and , where possible , some closure to those who have endured so much . like others , i welcome the progress on the compensation scheme . also like others , i would like to draw attention to two of my constituents who have suffered , and continue to suffer , because of the infected blood scandal . first , there is my constituent who was infected with hepatitis c in 1993 , two years after the cut - off date for the infected blood support scheme . as she told me at my surgery last week , her life has been utterly devastated . her sense of betrayal is felt even more keenly because at the point of her infection all blood should have been tested for hepatitis c by law . she has suffered terrible physical and mental illness for most of her life , including infertility and anxiety from the stigma of her illness — which is why i do not mention her name — and she has experienced an impact on her personal relationships and career . it was a cruel insult that my constituent , because she was infected after 1991 and was therefore not eligible for the infected blood support scheme , has been unable to access the crucial help that she needs to deal with the impacts i have mentioned . i welcome the removal of those cut - off dates in the new scheme , but i urge the government urgently to provide proper clarity on how the new scheme will work for her and others like her who were infected after 1991 . they need the details of exactly how it will work for them , and when they can expect to review the compensation that they so greatly deserve . secondly , i would like to mention the case of my constituent whose mother sadly died from hepatitis c in 1998 . in his communications with me , he has pointed out that the information available on the gov.uk website is very confusing , as others have mentioned . he finds it often poorly written , which only adds to his frustration and emotional stress . understandably , his main concern is that payments to the estates of those who have died from being given infected blood will be deprioritised and not excluded from any heads of loss . as others have pointed out , processes that delay these payments will result in many elderly affected people dying before receiving anything . can the government give assurances that siblings and children left behind now and in future will have the compensation safeguarded and will also receive what they rightly deserve ? like so many today , i welcome this government acting to ensure that the infected blood victims receive the compensation that they have long been owed . not long after being elected , i met one of my constituents who is a victim of the scandal . he was a core participant in the inquiry , and his case is referenced anonymously in the report . meeting him and hearing his story , about his fight for justice and the impact it has had on his life and his family , will forever remain with me . as a teenager , my constituent , who was being treated for haemophilia , went in for his annual health check . he was asked to wait outside by the doctor , who he trusted to act in his best interests . the doctor informed my constituent ’s father that his son had hiv and did not have long to live . his father was tasked with conveying this earth - shattering news to his son . i am relieved that he has defied the odds and is still here today , but let us be clear that the word “ scandal ” does not do justice to what happened to these people , who were simply accessing healthcare . my constituent welcomed the recommendations of the inquiry , the work by sir robert francis and the action that this government took immediately upon taking office to work to provide swift compensation to those impacted . he further welcomed the statements from the paymaster general and the prime minister , and the acknowledgement that the state , through successive governments , failed to protect some of the most vulnerable people in this country . that acknowledgment was really important to him , because he and others — all those who have been referenced today and beyond our doors , both infected and affected — have waited far too long for justice . it is welcome that , following feedback , the government have made a series of changes , including the regular support payments , new routes for those seeking bespoke compensation claims and packages for those subjected to unethical testing . it is positive that the infected blood compensation authority has begun the steps to deliver this scheme and ensure that compensation payments are made as soon as possible , and that the payments will start by the end of the year , because victims have already waited too long . as sir robert francis has said , that can provide a credible means of offering significant and , in many cases , life - changing sums to persons infected and affected by this terrible scandal . i thank the paymaster general for his recent response to queries that i raised on behalf of my constituent , and for the assurances that he gave in that correspondence , which my constituent very much appreciated . might i ask a final question , though , that my constituent has put to me on the legal fees that those campaigning have accrued ? is there potential for those to be covered , rather than their being covered by people ’s compensation payments ? although i welcome the swift action we have taken , we should never , ever have been in this position , and no amount of compensation can ever match the distress and the pain that this scandal has caused , compounded by the long delay in accessing justice . i will end by reiterating what others have said , because the motion before us is a testament to those , including my constituent , who have fought for decades to bring justice to those impacted . i pay tribute to all of them , as it is their work that has brought us to where we are today . i can not imagine how it will feel to finally receive the recognition and the acknowledgment of what has happened . it is incumbent on us to ensure that it happens swiftly and provides proper recourse . i hope that , as a result of the action that we are already taking by introducing the hillsborough law and the wider duty of candour , we can deliver a culture change so that no one will ever have to fight for justice like that again . i note that time is short . i will get through as many of the points that have been raised as i can , but i say to all right hon . and hon . members that my door is very much open ; please do follow up with a letter to me if there are specific points that you want me to provide a more detailed response to . i would be more than happy to do that . in this debate we should always start with the victims at the forefront of our minds — what they went through , and how long , unfairly , they had to fight for justice . several members have raised the excellent work that support groups do , in supporting victims and providing advocacy for them . the government will be engaging with those groups . the government will be asking what more support is required . several members asked about that ; the government will take that work forward . i will try to move through the points on the basis of the order in which they were raised , starting with i have set out a number of times in the house that payments will be beginning by the end of 2024 . a number of members asked about the initial 20 . the reason for that is that the ibca is adopting a test - and - learn approach . taking an initial representative group is the best way subsequently to ramp up the process to be as swift as possible . that has been done with the objective of getting money out of the door as quickly as possible . of course it will now be for the ibca to build a service that balances speed with ease of use — and of course data security , which i know would be another concern for the house . on the second set of regulations about the supplemental route in respect of the infected and the affected , i am saying not that they will be laid by the decision on the sequencing — the split between the infected and the affected that the government have adopted in these regulations — was made on the basis that it would allow orderly implementation of the legal framework without impacting or delaying the delivery timetable for payments to the infected and the affected . as i have said , i hope for , and am sure that i will have , the house ’s assistance in ensuring that the regulations can be approved by my hon . friend i have been asked a number of times about our next action , which involves the interim payments for the estates of the deceased infected . i promise that the deadline of the end of october will be met , and i will update the house tomorrow during cabinet office questions . i have also been asked about further opportunities to debate this issue . i have already promised that there will be a debate this year about progress on the implementation of sir brian langstaff ’s 12 recommendations . compensation is obviously one of them , and i am sure that the house will understand why i am trying to drive that forward as quickly as i can , but the others are hugely important as well , and will be debated in the house . one recommendation was for the establishment of a memorial , or memorials , in all the countries of the united kingdom . can my right hon . friend update me on where we are with that ? i hope to be able to make an announcement about it shortly . i have told the house previously how important i think the memorialisation proposals are , and they will certainly form part of the update that i will give the house before the end of the year . i join the liberal democrat spokesperson , the hon . lady and a number of other members asked about the severity bands . the scheme is tariff - based , and the tariffs were developed through the work of the infected blood inquiry response expert group , whose members were appointed by the right hon . member for salisbury when he was paymaster general . they were clinical and legal advisers , assisted by social care specialists . the government then chose to improve the scheme after the engagement exercise that sir robert francis carried out , as i mentioned to the right hon . gentleman during the general election campaign . the comparison between hiv and hepatitis c has been raised . for people infected with hepatitis c there are four severity bands , and they are designed in line with clinical diagnostic markers . recognised health conditions , for example liver damage , have , therefore , been informed by the work of the expert group . it is correct that in comparison there is a single severity band for people infected with hiv . that is because hiv is a lifelong infection . the vast majority of people infected with hiv through blood products have experienced progression to advanced symptomatic hiv disease , including aids conditions , and have died as a consequence of the infection . those who survived continue to be severely impacted by the infection , and the view of the expert group was that it was disproportionately complex and onerous to disaggregate that category into different experiences , and that contrasted with hepatitis , where there is a wide range of experiences , including both acute infections with long - term limited impacts and very serious and ultimately fatal infections . that is the approach , based on the expert group , that the government have adopted . similarly , on siblings , which several members have raised , the scheme is based on recommendations from sir robert francis ’s framework compensation study . it does not exclude siblings over 18 who may have been carers and provided care . will the right hon . gentleman confirm that when he assessed the june engagement exercise that sir robert francis supervised , he did not resist any of the recommendations from the expert group that interrogated the scheme — apart from four or five where he thought the government could do better — and there was no attempt either by the previous government or his to resist the advice of the expert group who are engaged with the communities ? the right hon . gentleman is absolutely right . he took exactly the same approach that i did to the expert group . i accepted , as i told the house , 69 of the 74 recommendations , including , crucially , the continuation of the support schemes . on the other five , there were reasons of simplicity or speed — of getting compensation to people more quickly . i hope the house will take the assurance that there is that imperative to act as quickly as possible . i am exceptionally grateful for the right hon . gentleman ’s explanation of how the different tariffs have been arrived at , which aids comprehension . however , will he also explain a little more about what the expert group did to engage with the affected communities so that they can better understand the tariff for themselves ? as my hon . friend on the unethical research — an appalling and dreadful practice — the government have accepted the amount of money that was suggested , but it should be emphasised always that these are not payments in isolation ; they are just a part , and in the vast majority of cases will be a small proportion , of the amounts of money that will be paid out . my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend it was a privilege to listen to a fantastic maiden speech by my hon . friend “ our ignorance was engineered by those in power . ” it is worth reflecting on that sentence as we look at the changes that we will need to make , beyond ensuring that people receive compensation . my hon . friend i note that , understandably , the first constituent my hon . friend i am grateful to my right hon . friend for his answers . notwithstanding his reassurances , widespread concerns are still being expressed by those who have been affected or infected as a result of this scandal , so will he agree to a meeting with the all - party parliamentary group on haemophilia and contaminated blood , in his department , to discuss the issues that they still want to raise ? i would be only too delighted to engage with the all - party parliamentary group , and i am sure that if my hon . friend sends an invitation in the usual way , we can find a mutually convenient date . my hon . friend has just referred to the all - party group , and the spirit in which this debate has been conducted is really important . it is crucial that that cross - party approach continues . we are dealing with people who have been failed by the state , and we must acknowledge that . the regulations we are debating ensure that we can finally deliver compensation to those who have fought so hard and waited so long for justice in the most harrowing of circumstances . they deserve nothing less , and i hope that colleagues across the house will join me in supporting the regulations . i commend them to the house . question put and agreed to . resolved , that the infected blood compensation scheme regulations 2024 ( si , 2024 , no . 872 ) , dated i beg to move , that the iran ( sanctions ) ( amendment ) regulations 2024 ( si , 2024 , no . 944 ) , dated these regulations amend the iran ( sanctions ) regulations 2023 . the instrument was laid before parliament on the proper implementation and enforcement of uk sanctions is critical to maximising their impact , and this government are committed to improving the uk ’s track record on sanctions enforcement . that is why , on i have also brought together ministerial colleagues on sanctions enforcement , and colleagues in the treasury , the home office , the department for business and trade , the department for transport and the department for energy security and net zero are working towards a shared vision of how to enhance it . that will include ways in which we can further support uk overseas territories and crown dependencies with their sanctions enforcement . we plan to be transparent on what we are doing , and i look forward to updating parliament on enforcement actions in due course . the government have deployed sanctions in innovative and impactful ways , including in the sanctions package we are putting forward today . we have taken swift and decisive action to increase pressure on russia ’s war machine , spearheading a call to action at the european political community in july to tackle russia ’s shadow fleet . we have sanctioned 43 oil tankers that were transporting russian oil , as well as nine liquefied natural gas vessels involved in shipping russian lng , including from russia ’s flagship arctic lng 2 project , to target the kremlin ’s energy revenues . we have also enhanced our response to the threat from the iranian regime , and i will now turn to the details of the instrument before us . it contains measures to deter the government of iran from causing regional and international instability , by disrupting its unmanned aerial vehicle and missile industries and its access to items critical for military development . i hope the house will support these important measures today . the iranian regime ’s development and proliferation of large volumes of advanced conventional weapons , including uavs and missiles , continues to destabilise the middle east and also prolongs russia ’s illegal war in ukraine . iran ’s use of an unprecedented number of uavs and missiles during its attack on israel on the iranian regime also used hundreds of these arms in its attack against israel on we are deeply concerned about the prospect of further escalation , and all efforts must now be concentrated on breaking the cycle of violence . at this moment , when tensions are at their peak , calm heads must prevail and all sides must take immediate steps to de - escalate . a regional war is , of course , in no one ’s interest . however , this is the latest incident in the long history of iran destabilising the region , including through its political , financial and military support for its proxies and partners , such as hezbollah , hamas , the houthis and its aligned militia groups in iraq and syria . we have been clear and consistent that iran must cease this support . i thank the hon . gentleman for his generosity in giving way . does he accept that the islamic revolutionary guard corps is a key component of the destabilisation sponsored by the iranian regime ? will he update the house on the government ’s thinking on proscribing that organisation ? i think he would find many allies across the house who would be keen to see that happen . i thank the right hon . gentleman for his comments . we of course recognise the huge threat that the irgc poses , and we will take the necessary measures to counter it at home and around the world . he will understand that the government keep the list of proscribed terrorist organisations under careful review , and we do not , of course , comment in the house on whether an organisation may be under consideration . as i said , iran is now one of russia ’s top military backers and has supplied it with hundreds of uavs since 2022 , including different models of drones . russia has used those to target ukraine ’s critical infrastructure and to kill innocent civilians , prolonging the suffering of the ukrainian people . in september , iran supplied russia with hundreds of close - range ballistic missiles . that is a further escalation of iran ’s military support for russia ’s war of aggression against ukraine and will further enable russia ’s invasion . in return , iran is receiving russian military and technological support , enabling it to further develop its military capabilities and enhancing the risk it poses to the region and beyond . the legislation before us expands the uk ’s trade sanctions against iran , with the aim of disrupting its uav and missile industry and its access to items critical to military development . it includes sanctions in relation to the items on the russia common high priority list . the list , which was jointly agreed by the uk , the eu , the us and japan in the context of russia ’s war against ukraine , identifies items that russia is using in its weapons systems , ranging from semiconductors to machine tools . those items are also significant in iran ’s production of advanced conventional weapons . as the house will know , there have been many public reports about iran ’s supply of weapons to russia . through the instrument , we are therefore prohibiting the export , supply , delivery and making available of those items to iran . we are also prohibiting the provision of ancillary services associated with the goods , such as brokering services , technical assistance , financial services and funds . all the items prohibited by our partners in the eu in may are also prohibited by the instrument . in addition , prohibitions will be applied to some items identified by the ministry of defence as significant to iran ’s uav and missile industries . we have also taken the opportunity to simplify some of the existing trade sanctions on iran so that businesses are better able to implement them . these trade restrictions complement our existing export controls and sanctions , ensuring that no uk business or person , wherever they are in the world , can facilitate the export , transfer , supply , delivery and making available of these items to iran without prior authorisation . i hope that the house will support these measures . i commend them to the house . rose — order . may i remind members that if they intend to speak in a debate , they need to be here for the opening ? it is a particular discourtesy to the house if the front - bench spokespersons are not here at the beginning . the conservative party supports the regulations , which extend the iran sanctions regime to drones and drone technology as well as financial services , funds and brokering services relating to items of strategic concern . however , these sanctions seek to address issues emblematic of a far larger threat . the government should be in no doubt that iran ’s malign influence is one of the biggest challenges to both global and british security . for decades , iran has deliberately undermined the rules - based international order , destabilising its neighbourhood and funding terrorism globally , all while brutally repressing its own people and committing a femicide . for years , the iranian regime has created asymmetric threats , co - opted existing movements and provided weapons , money and training to its proxies and ideological partners . be they hamas in gaza , hezbollah in lebanon , the houthis in yemen or shi’a militias and the popular mobilisation forces across iraq and syria , they are terrorist organisations that have no interest in their local people and instead pursue the aims of the ayatollah ; hostage captors and committers of the worst atrocity against the jewish people since the holocaust ; and actors disrupting maritime traffic in the red sea , a sea link that is vital for the delivery of food and fertiliser to countries facing serious hunger crises in east africa and south asia . as the minister set out , iran is now embedding itself in conflict on our own continent , transferring hundreds of attack drones and , as we now know , ballistic missiles to russia to prop up its barbaric , illegal and unprovoked renewed invasion of ukraine . they are fuelling a war machine that seeks to dismantle a sovereign democratic state in europe and enabling the murder of ukrainians every single day . the government must now allow ukraine ’s use of long - range weaponry on strategic targets . escalation warrants a response or further deterrence will be undermined . the invasion of ukraine is an attack on us all . iran is that hand in glove for russia , the perpetrator . here at home , there have been numerous iranian plots to assassinate british or uk - based individuals whom the regime considers its enemies . the uk has had to respond to more than 15 such plots since 2022 . we have seen iranian cut - outs investigated for spreading irgc propaganda and for glorifying sanctioned individuals and terrorists . we have seen irgc generals providing radicalising lectures here in our capital city . even on our streets , we have seen people glorifying organisations such as the houthis and others who are not acting in defence of gaza and who are not progressive movements ; they are terrorists . iran has also arbitrarily detained and imprisoned british citizens , including nazanin zaghari - ratcliffe , whose shocking ordeal proves beyond doubt iran ’s disdain for human rights and human dignity . as the conservative government demonstrated , we can take a muscular approach . we introduced the extensive sanctions regime to disrupt iran ’s hostile behaviour , targeting its decision makers along with those who did its bidding . we imposed measures to help choke off the funding flows from iran to hamas and palestinian islamic jihad , as well as sanctions on iran ’s drone programme ; indeed , 400 sanctions were in place on iran by the time we left office , and in 2023 alone we made 154 new designations . alongside the us and with support from allies , we carried out strikes against the houthis in yemen to degrade their capabilities , aiding and supporting allies across the world . british military personnel and equipment helped to defend israel from an iranian attack in april , and we told the regime in tehran in no uncertain terms that it must rein in its proxies . when the government propose measures such as the regulations before the house to counter iran ’s appalling behaviour , we will support them , but we are also very clear that the government need to maintain the pressure and look at the bigger picture in equal measure to respond to the ever - growing threat . that point takes me on to the strategy that we are pursuing . we must stop compartmentalising our response and approach to iran . we need to work out how we will measure success in reducing the threat of iran to our people and our interests . the government must do this work . iran does not currently pursue active and direct confrontation with us , but its threshold for chaos is too high . we must work out how we will reduce that threat . iran will continue to do as it sees fit — its priority is the survival of the regime , and it has strategic patience — but we need to shape a strategy not in response to iran , but in the pursuit of our ambitions , protecting our people and our interests . unfortunately , we can not rely on the usa to lead . we need a new euro - atlantic focus , but the uk must decide what our priorities are . we must also be prepared for fractures within the regime . we must recognise that although iran rarely changes its behaviour , it has a cycle of boom and bust and we must be prepared for what may fall out . i urge the minister to take the opportunity to restructure ; i recognise that he is the minister for sanctions rather than for north africa , but i know that he will take these words back to the department . it is time for us to rethink our strategy on iran and move from being reactive to being proactive . we need long - term thinking on how we restore state control over areas abused by iranian - backed non - state actors . that includes the implementation of un resolution 1701 and the removal of hezbollah military positions from southern lebanon , with the lebanese military being able to reassert sovereign control . we also need a strategic approach to the houthis that prioritises the restoration of proper governance in yemen , including payment to public servants and protections against houthi embezzlement of public funds . domestically , we must bolster our resilience and protect our society from corrosive iranian influence and transnational repression , which is extensive . the national security act 2023 should be implemented in full as quickly as possible , including the register of foreign lobbyists , which shamefully the government have delayed . i urge them to put it in place as soon as possible . there is no reason for it not to proceed at speed . internationally , we must work with our partners to contain the looming threat of a nuclear iran . the joint comprehensive plan of action needs revisiting . there is no perfect deal , but the current situation is untenable . the jcpoa is on life support . we need a new euro - atlantic approach . antony blinken ’s comment that iran ’s nuclear break - out time is now one to two weeks should concern us all . it is a nuclear threshold state . we have the agency to disrupt iran ’s malign plans and to lead the international community in doing so if we have the courage to act and are prepared to develop a harder edge . the time to act must be now . i will be grateful if the minister answers the following questions . when will the government proscribe the irgc ? that was a promise that labour made in opposition , and promises matter . will he work with allies to ensure that sanctions are international and ensure their effectiveness in curbing iranian drone development exports ? individual sanctions programmes do not work ; they must be done on a multilateral basis . will the minister work to ensure that the office of financial sanctions implementation is pursuing penalties against those who breach sanctions ? we have not seen any being pursued when there have been breaches of sanctions around russia . we must see that happening on both iran and russia . does he agree that in addition to using sanctions , we must buttress ukraine ’s military capability requirements so that it can take down iranian drones in the skies and match the weapon range of russia ’s armed forces ? that means the use of storm shadow missiles . finally , with proxies such as hezbollah being degraded , will the minister commit to working towards freeing captured societies from iranian influence and helping states such as lebanon to reassert their independence and state effectiveness ? will he assert in clear terms that the government condemn all iranian proxies and will assist good - faith actors in resisting their proliferation , political entrenchment and military expansion and pursue a new uk coherent strategy to protect our people , our country and our interests from an increasingly belligerent iran ? the government ’s message to iran at all times must be that its threshold for chaos is too high . they must step back , because the current approach is not working , but that starts with us recognising that we can be in the driving seat and stop reacting to iran . i thank the minister for his speech on this really important issue . the continued instability in the region is of growing concern to many of us , not just because of the immense loss of life but because of the ever - growing security risk for this country . the government have been clearly leading calls for de - escalation in the region . does the minister agree that it is time once again to redouble our efforts with those calls , so that all parties in the region show restraint ? i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i appreciate your earlier guidance and apologise to you and the house . i rise to speak on behalf of my party in support of today ’s measures . the liberal democrats have for a long time supported a strengthening of uk sanctions against the iranian regime , not least in the light of the murder of mahsa amini just over two years ago . after mahsa ’s brutal murder by the iranian morality police , iranians took to the streets in their hundreds of thousands . violence was meted out by the iranian authorities against those brave individuals . more than 20,000 were detained , with women and girls particularly targeted , and ultimately some were executed by the iranian authorities . such behaviour is characteristic of the iranian regime . the foreign , commonwealth and development office ’s own human rights and democracy report , in its most recent iteration , labels iran as one of the worst executers globally . more than 500 people were executed in 2022 , including two young offenders . the report also identifies the continued erosion and systematic violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms such as freedom of expression and belief , the tightening of restrictions against women and girls and , chillingly , the use of facial recognition software to identify those deemed to be improperly dressed . just as the iranian regime sees fit to violate the basic rights of its own citizens at home , its influence abroad is similarly malign , both in the middle east and closer to home . it is iranian drones — more than 8,000 of them — that have come to vladimir putin ’s aid and been launched continually into ukraine since the start of the war . we supported the strong condemnation by the uk and our e3 partners of the news that iranian ballistic missiles were also now being exported to russia for use against our ukrainian allies . to that end , we welcome today ’s sanctions , which extend existing sanctions against uavs to other goods and technology of strategic concern , from cameras designed for uavs to microwave amplifiers . we trust that the minister will keep the list under continual review , not least to ensure that we are preventing the future supply of anything that russia might seek to procure from the iranians . will he update the house on what discussions he or his colleagues have had with e3 counterparts or others regarding the status of the jcpoa ? what is the government ’s stance on the jcpoa , given iran ’s seeming disregard for international law ? the liberal democrats also urge the government to go further on sanctions . the past few weeks have served as a demonstration of iran ’s terrible influence within the middle east , and in particular the role of the irgc . we condemn the barrage of ballistic missiles fired against israel by iran ’s irgc at the beginning of the month . the irgc continues to supply rockets and weaponry to its terrorist proxies , hamas , hezbollah and the houthis , who have caused so much death and misery in the middle east . in 2022 , security services revealed 10 plots organised by the irgc in that year alone here on british soil where the intention was to kidnap or kill british nationals or uk residents . the previous conservative government did not proscribe the irgc . in opposition , the now foreign secretary said : “ the irgc is behaving like a terrorist organisation and must now be proscribed as such . ” i agree , so will the minister take that long overdue step and proscribe the irgc as a terrorist organisation ? not only will that have a positive impact in the region , but it will make the iranian diaspora in the uk safer and more secure . i am sure that members on both sides of the house have british - iranian constituents who are deeply concerned about how the irgc has been able to operate with limited constraints in this country . we welcome any steps forward to strengthen our sanctions regime against iran , but we will continue to make the case to the government that the single most effective thing that they can do is proscribe the irgc . i have two remaining points . recalling the case of nazanin zaghari - ratcliffe , who is thankfully now back in the uk with her family following the six years that she spent in prison in iran , the labour party committed in its manifesto to introducing a right to consular assistance in cases of human rights violations — a measure that we support . i raised yesterday the case of british - egyptian dual national alaa abd el - fattah , who is being held without consular access in egypt . will the minister update the house on when the right to consular assistance will be introduced ? i would be interested in hearing what difference the hon . gentleman thinks proscription of the islamic revolutionary guard corps would make . on alaa abd el - fattah , the problem is that the egyptians do not recognise dual nationality , so a right to consular access would make no fundamental difference . having led an inquiry on this , i would be grateful if he explained why he thinks a right to consular access would make a fundamental difference in any such hostage case . on the irgc , we believe that proscribing that terrorist organisation , which runs a state in the region , would put considerable constraints on its ability to operate around the world and prohibit many of its actions , including those in the uk and threats against british citizens , to which i referred . i know that the hon . lady has taken a strong interest in the case that i mentioned — indeed , she mentioned it in the house yesterday — and is also working on the denial of consular access . it seems to me that consular access is a critical role of the foreign , commonwealth and development office . in the case that we are discussing , it is not clear to the family of alaa abd el - fattah that the foreign office has made sufficient effort to secure that access in egypt , and it is in that context that i raise this particular question . i would be interested in the minister ’s response on when consular assistance will be guaranteed to those who have suffered human rights violations . secondly , as we use sanctions against those with links to the iranian regime , we urge the government to look closely at where those individuals , and others with links to the regime , have stashed their money . has some of that money been funnelled into london , as is the case with so many other kleptocratic regimes , and will the minister commit to carrying out an audit so that we know where those assets are — including those that have been entrusted in the name of family members — and can freeze them accordingly ? i hope that the minister will update the house on whether the government are considering any plans for a third piece of economic crime legislation to close loopholes in the two previous acts , including by finally delivering a comprehensive approach to the register of beneficial ownership . finally , my right hon . friend i thank the minister for his statement , which i welcome both for its steadfast support of ukraine and for its action on iran . as we have heard from everyone in the debate , iran poses a threat to both regional and global stability . the iranian regime is not just exporting weapons to support russia ’s despicable illegal war in ukraine ; it is exporting terror — we have heard mention of the houthis and various other groups . it is — and i thank we know that iran poses a threat , and we know that that threat is growing , so i welcome the cross - party consensus that the measures make real sense . i thank the minister for introducing the regulations , and i ask that the fcdo keep a close eye on the threat that iran poses so that we can take further measures if needed , to back up the government ’s strong action to confront the threat of iran head on . i strongly welcome the regulations . as my hon . friend we have debated ukraine many times , and will continue to do so . the minister has taken a close interest in the issue , and i thank him for his support in opposition — both sides of the house are united in support for ukraine . the measures will help a little , but the minister will know that ukraine is suffering desperately . the casualties , which are being inflicted in part by the weapons that , hopefully , this measure will help to stop reaching russia , are horrendous , and stopping those attacks is part of president zelensky ’s victory plan . i echo the comments of my hon . friend the member for rutland and stamford that we need to do more to support ukraine to implement its victory plan , particularly by allowing it not only to shoot down attacks from drones and missiles over its own territory but to attack where they originate , outside the border of ukraine in russia . it is not going to be enough just to stop the supply of weapons from iran . we know that they are being supplied by other countries , in particular north korea — and not just weapons , but potentially troops as well . therefore , i hope that we will look at sanctions enforcement across all the countries that are giving succour to russia . i want to touch on one or two other aspects of iranian behaviour . the minister knows that sanctions are used to try to put an economic squeeze on countries that have breached international rules , and also to uphold human rights . in particular , the use of magnitsky sanctions is now well established . the minister may be aware that i chair the all - party parliamentary group on media freedom . iran ’s record in that area is terrible : it is 176th out of 180 on the index of press freedom . as rsf — reporters without borders — has pointed out , more than 100 journalists have been interrogated , detained or imprisoned since the start of the protest movement in 2022 ; 16 remain in prison due to their work , alongside another 19 who were there before . we are not just talking about within iran ; the minister will know that the irgc lies behind the attacks on journalists in london . iran international has had to have protection and move offices because of a continuing threat by the irgc against its journalists . i have talked to the management of iran international and some of its very brave journalists , one of whom was attacked in the streets of london . we are not just talking about iran international , either . members of the bbc persian service continue to be subject to threats and harassment , and their families in iran are being pressured by the regime to try to reach those journalists . for those reasons , i echo the calls that have been made already by my hon . friend the member for rutland and stamford and the liberal democrat spokesman , imposing sanctions is clearly an important part of putting pressure on iran , but they need to be enforced . one of the benefits of having professional investigative journalists is that they are sometimes able to expose things that otherwise remain hidden . if the minister has not done so , will he study carefully this week ’s edition of the economist ? the economist has carried out an in - depth investigation of the enforcement of the sanctions imposed by america on iran , and the way in which those sanctions are being completely bypassed . apparently , iran is currently selling 1.8 million barrels of oil per day , almost all of which end up in china . they do so through a whole host of front organisations . individual components of the iranian regime , including the irgc and the quds force , are given crude oil to market and they then set up their own front organisations . they use shadow organisations to procure tanker movements ; they have banks that support that activity ; and as i say , a large part of that oil ends up in china , which is the main purchaser . the money then flows back through that network directly to iran . although i do not necessarily believe that that is done knowingly , the economist also states : “ london is the world ’s sixth - biggest base by number of iranian - linked entities blacklisted by america . ” as such , i hope the minister will look carefully at not just tightening the noose around the regime , but making sure that the loopholes that are currently being exploited to get around sanctions are properly closed down , in this country and elsewhere . as i have said , today ’s motion is very welcome , but we need to do a lot more . i welcome the opportunity not just to give my support to the proposal to continue and extend sanctions , but to put on record my condemnation of the iranian regime and to give my support to the women and girls of iran , who have been so brave in fighting for their rights in the face of brutal suppression . sanctions imposed on iran come as we see increased hostility by groups associated with iran , or by iran itself , at an international level . most recently , iran ’s two direct attacks on israel this year , which the uk and western allies have condemned as escalatory actions in an already precarious situation , speak volumes about the threat that the regime represents . one of the purposes of the uk ’s sanctions on iran is to deter its government , or an armed group backed by that government , from conducting hostile activity against the uk or any other country . the removal of sanctions should come only when there is evidence that iran has disengaged from that hostile activity , yet all we have seen is the opposite . since may 2019 , iran has continued to violate the joint comprehensive plan of action implemented to limit the iranian nuclear programme in exchange for sanctions relief . furthermore , it is well known that iran funds multiple groups across the middle east designated by the uk as terrorist organisations . those proxies act to destabilise the region as a whole , but iran ’s activities are not limited to the middle east . as has been said in the chamber already , there have been a number of threats to individuals in the uk emanating from iran , and as the minister outlined , it is now providing extensive support for the illegal war in ukraine — both military and logistical — which is impacting directly on the lives of brave ukrainian soldiers seeking to defend their country . as i said at the start of my speech , iran ’s terrorist actions sadly extend to its own people . we know that iran ’s people currently live under a violent , oppressive regime . in september 2022 , mahsa amini , a 22 - year - old iranian - kurdish woman , was arrested by iran ’s morality police for allegedly not complying with the country ’s islamic dress code . three days later , she tragically died in police custody , sparking a wave of protests across iran and drawing the attention of the international community . despite iranian officials claiming that mahsa amini died of natural causes , the widespread protests that followed were a clear response to years of repression , with demonstrators demanding justice , freedom and accountability . the bravery of these protesters can not be overstated . the iranian government ’s heavy - handed response was brutal , with the un fact - finding mission and iran human rights reporting that over 550 protesters were killed by security forces . those deaths represent the highest death toll seen in any protests since the islamic republic ’s founding in 1979 , and are a stark reminder of the dangers faced by those who dare to voice dissent . sadly , the plight of women in iran is not limited to the enforcement of hijab laws , but extends to many aspects of daily life , rooted in systemic discrimination that is codified in law . the situation becomes even more alarming when we consider the lack of protection against domestic violence . iran currently has no law to safeguard women from abuse or femicide , and between march 2021 and june 2023 , at least 165 women were killed by male family members in honour killings . that remains an ongoing and disturbing tragedy . i am also deeply concerned by iran ’s treatment of followers of the baha’i faith , which the un has referred to as “ the most egregious forms of repression , persecution and victimisation . ” in february 2022 , iranian authorities allowed only recognised religions to be stated on the new national id card . in doing so , they deprived unrecognised religious minorities of access to many basic services . without that id , iranian nationals are unable to obtain credit cards , driver ’s licences or passports ; nor can they buy property , cash cheques or apply for loans . that is clear evidence of serious discrimination against minority groups . i am proud that , at the 78th un general assembly under the last government , the uk co - sponsored the iran human rights resolution calling for iran to eliminate in law and in practice all forms of discrimination on the basis of thought , conscience , religion or belief . although that was a strong message from international partners , it fell on deaf ears , but the uk government , alongside allies such as australia , canada , new zealand and the united states , have made their stance clear . in september , our foreign secretary called on the iranian government to end human rights abuses and to cease the use of force to impose the hijab . we should continue to press the iranian regime to respect the rights of its citizens , and we remain committed to holding it to account for violations through sanctions and international pressure . we must not turn a blind eye to human rights abuses in iran . we stand in solidarity with the iranian people , especially the women and other minority groups who are leading the fight for dignity , equality and justice . our sanctions regime is an important part of how we stand up for our values and for the victims of the iranian regime both in iran and abroad , and i enthusiastically support the motion securing their continuation and expansion . like all other members , i rise in support of these important regulations . they of course expand existing sanctions , targeting additional goods and technology related to the iranian military development and iran ’s production of unmanned aerial vehicles and missiles . in recent weeks we have all seen not only that iran has launched yet a further unprecedented missile attack on israel , which has rightly attracted universal condemnation , but that the uk government have announced further aid to ukraine in its struggle against russian aggression . as we all know , russia ’s war effort and its breaches of international humanitarian law are supported by the supply of iranian uavs and missiles . i agree with those who have spoken that iran , in both instances , through its supply of uavs and missiles to various states and non - state terrorist organisations , is prolonging the war in ukraine and risking the further escalation of conflicts in the middle east . in a speech to the un security council last month , the foreign secretary rightly emphasised the importance of upholding a rules - based international order , especially international humanitarian law . in both those respects , i am sure we can all agree that iran is a destabilising influence in the region and further afield . as we have heard said so eloquently by if we hope to see a more peaceful future , we must ensure that all nations adhere to international law and , where necessary , act to enforce such compliance . sanctions such as those before us are very important tools that the international community can use to apply pressure on regimes , such as iran ’s , that contravene international law . i am particularly pleased that the minister outlined how the government co - ordinated the efforts on these sanctions with international partners such as the european union , the united states and japan . it is clear that , if these are to be effective , there needs to be a co - ordinated effort across the globe . although i acknowledge that the government have previously introduced a separate sanctions regime and financial sanctions to encourage iran to comply with international human rights law , i think it is important to refer to the long - standing concerns about the state ’s atrocious human rights record . to echo the words of the hon . member for bexhill and battle , we will all be familiar with the woman , life , freedom movement and the protests that followed the tragic death in custody of mahsa amini , who was arrested by the iranian morality police for improperly wearing her hijab . amnesty international and others have noted grave human rights violations in iran since these protests , including further suppression of the rights of freedom of expression , association and peaceful assembly , and the intensification of the iranian regime ’s crackdown on the rights of women and girls . thousands were subjected to interrogation , arbitrary detention , unjust prosecution and imprisonment for peacefully exercising their human rights — rights that we take for granted in this country . these are all reasons why we should take a firm approach to any contravention of international law by the iranian regime , and i would welcome the minister ’s assurances that the government continue to monitor the effectiveness of sanctions introduced to encourage the iranian regime to comply with international humanitarian law . in returning to the dreadful consequences of iran ’s supply of uavs and missiles to various states and non - state actors across the world , we should also bear in mind that sanctions can form only part of any strategy . as the united nations stated : “ sanctions do not operate , succeed or fail in a vacuum . the measures are most effective at maintaining or restoring international peace and security when applied as part of a comprehensive strategy encompassing peacekeeping , peacebuilding and peacemaking . ” the sanctions must therefore fit into a wider approach that the uk takes towards the situation in the middle east , where we also support de - escalation and peacebuilding initiatives as they arise . we must be firm and fair . where there are opportunities for de - escalation , we must take them , while remaining steadfast in our support of international law and preparedness to sanction states such as iran that act to undermine it . i welcome today ’s motion to approve iranian sanctions ; it marks an essential and targeted response to iran ’s growing military threat . by expanding sanctions to cover these additional goods and technology , particularly those contributing to iran ’s uavs and missiles , we are striking at the core of iran ’s military - industrial complex . that is crucial in disrupting iran ’s capability to continue not just fuelling conflicts in the middle east , but aiding russia ’s war against ukraine . russia ’s recent desperate procurement of weapons from north korea shows that russia is struggling . by cutting off iran ’s support , we further tighten the pressure on russia ’s war machine , limiting the lifeline that iran provides and squeezing their ability to continue the brutal conflict in ukraine . since august 2022 , iran has supplied russia with hundreds of shahed-136 drones , which have been used extensively to target ukrainian civilians and infrastructure . last month , the us confirmed that iran had transferred shipments of fath-360 ballistic missiles to russia . those missiles , with a range of 75 miles , allow russian forces to conserve their more advanced long - range missiles for other strategic targets . the fath-360 missiles will undoubtedly be employed within weeks , which i fear could lead to more civilian casualties in ukraine . russia has already deployed iranian drones to strike critical infrastructure , and the missiles that are being transferred will clearly have a similar role . dozens of russian personnel have been trained in iran to use these systems , deepening the co - operation between the two regimes . iran has already shown us its character by striking at the heart of the uk . as we heard from i really wanted to be here for this debate , but i would have had to be in two places at the same time and i can be in only one , so i apologise for that , madam deputy speaker . as the chair of the all - party parliamentary group for international freedom of religion or belief , i want to put the following on the record . does the hon . gentleman agree that the suppression of human rights , the persecution of christians , shi’as and baha’is , and the denial of education , jobs and the right even to have a life puts iran in one of the four top countries in the world where the right to live is suppressed to such levels ? i am grateful to the hon . member for pointing that out ; he is absolutely right . not only is there no tolerance for alternative views or beliefs , but iran was mentioned in the fcdo human rights report in 2022 , and on the basis of that report the liberal democrats called — and have done for years — for us to withhold arms licences to iran , most obviously , and also to israel and the occupied palestinian territories . our stance on the export of arms to the region is of long standing and very much in line with the human rights report produced by the fcdo in 2022 . we need to take stronger action on iranian assets here within the uk . we call for the wider use of magnitsky sanctions . we should specifically target the relatives of sanctioned individuals who have transferred wealth in order to avoid the measures . in the past few weeks we have witnessed just how easy it is to dodge sanctions on russian oil . we must cut off those financially supporting iran from london , blocking their access to the world ’s second - largest financial hub . that will help stop the flow of dirty money and ensure that those who support iran ’s military operations directly or indirectly are punished . i will draw to a close . will the minister comment in his summing up on whether the government will continue to monitor the export of some of the goods we are talking about today , in particular to states that neighbour iran ? with the sanctions imposed on russia , we have seen a subsequent uptick in the export of machine tools , for example , to some of the states that surround russia . will the uk monitor that ? we stand ready to support any further steps that will limit iran ’s capacity to cause harm in the middle east and ukraine . in the face of iran ’s continued support for russia ’s brutal war , these sanctions send a clear message . we must keep up the pressure and not let up until iran ’s threats to global security diminishes . i thank all right hon . and hon . members for their contributions . they have made some important points , and i thank them for their wholehearted support for the regulations . it is important that we maintain unity in the house on these measures to tackle these regimes , whether it be russia or iran . as i said earlier , these measures represent a step forward in our capability to restrict iran ’s proliferation of advanced conventional weapons , which continue to fuel the conflict we have been discussing in the middle east and to support russia in its illegal war in ukraine . we are firmly committed to using sanctions to hold the iranian regime to account for its malign activities in the uk and elsewhere . i should point out that we do not just have these regulations . continuing on from measures under the previous administration , on we have consistently raised our concerns directly with the iranian regime and , indeed , with a range of partners . on it is clear from the tenor of the house — i have to say as a woman that i find it incredibly moving to hear my hon . friend i wholeheartedly agree with the hon . lady ’s comments . as she knows , we do not comment on future designations , but i have certainly heard the strong voice across the house today , which reflects the horrific reality for women and girls — ordinary iranian civilians — under that repressive regime . i thank her overall for her support . she rightly highlighted a series of iran ’s malign actions . i agree with her that those promoting proscribed organisations in the uk should face the full force of the law . that is for our law enforcement agencies , but the prime minister and others have made that absolutely clear . the hon . lady raised concerns in relation to the foreign influence registration scheme . i assure her that we remain absolutely committed to that . we will further strengthen our national security while maintaining the uk as an international hub for business . announcements on the tiers will be made at a later stage , but we are absolutely committed to it — it is not going anywhere . we are committed to moving forward with that agenda and i have been discussing it with colleagues across government . the hon . lady and others mentioned the jcpoa . let me be clear : snapback remains an option . we remain in close contact with e3 and other partners , and i will say a little more on that in a moment . i refer her to my previous comments on the irgc as a whole . she and other hon . members asked me about the internationalisation of sanctions . absolutely , this is about working with partners . are we looking at how we can increase penalties and enforcement ? absolutely , whether that be otsi or others . obviously , i can not comment on future investigations and designations . the hon . lady asked about wider uk military support to ukraine . i point to the very important announcement yesterday , on top of existing commitments . the extraordinary revenue acceleration will deliver an additional £ 2.26 billion to ukraine for crucial needs , working with our partners across the g7 . i will come on to lebanon in a moment , but do i condemn all the proxies that iran is supporting ? absolutely . we have been very clear about that . other right hon . and hon . members made important points . my hon . friend i thank before concluding , let me briefly touch on a couple of the specific themes that came out of the debate . let me be clear : iran ’s actions in relation to israel are completely unacceptable . the prime minister and the foreign secretary have been absolutely clear that we stand with israel and recognise its right to self - defence in the face of iranian aggression . we absolutely condemn in the strongest terms its attack against israel . we designated individuals specifically in response to the attack on israel , including senior military figures and entities involved in iran ’s ballistic missile programme . i referred to the jcpoa , but let me be clear that iran ’s nuclear escalation since 2019 has gone far beyond jcpoa limits and is undermining the deal . alongside our e3 partners , we will use all diplomatic options available to ensure that iran never develops a nuclear weapon , including triggering the snapback of all un sanctions lifted under the jcpoa if necessary . i mentioned the actions that we have taken against regional proxies , but let me remind the house that the uk proscribes the entirety of hezbollah as a terrorist organisation , and has an asset freeze in place against the entire organisation . we assess hamas in their entirety to be concerned with terrorism , and therefore proscribe the organisation in full . the houthis are sanctioned in their entirety by the uk and are subject to a targeted arms embargo . on human rights , as i said , there are 94 human rights sanctions on iranian individuals and entities . the horrifically high rate of executions is a deliberate attempt to instil fear and stifle dissent in iran . as a government we remain opposed to the death penalty in all circumstances , as a matter of principle . the situation for women and girls is truly horrific . we condemn iran ’s appalling treatment of women and girls , including through its repressive policies . we will work with international partners to engage with the findings of the un special rapporteur on iranian human rights . media freedoms were also mentioned ; as a member of the media freedom coalition , we are determined to ensure that journalists are able to do their jobs without fear of retribution . given the situation for detainees and the historical cases involving nazanin zaghari - ratcliffe and others , we continue to believe that british nationals and british - iranian dual nationals are at significant risk of detention in iran . british nationals are advised not to travel to iran , but we do not and never will accept our nationals being used as diplomatic leverage . again , i apologise for not being here earlier to ask the minister a question directly . the irgc is quite clearly the leader of iran ’s private army . it is involved in some of the worst repression , murders and despicable acts across all of iran . is it not time to collate all this information and put it together to hold those people accountable for what they are doing , and for human rights abuses in iran ? i made clear our position on the irgc earlier , but as i pointed out , we have sanctioned directly a number of individuals involved with that organisation . we recognise the threat that it poses and will take the necessary measures to counter it at home and around the world , but obviously we do not comment on future designations . the safety and security of the united kingdom from iran ’s malign actions has been raised on a number of occasions . it was rightly pointed out that the uk has identified at least 15 threats towards uk - based individuals . our police , intelligence and security agencies have been confronting these threats for many years , but their seriousness has increased in recent months . let me be clear : we will always stand up to threats from foreign nations , and we will continue to work closely with our international partners to identify , deter , and respond to those threats . lastly , on lebanon , we have been very clear that a political solution consistent with resolution 1701 is the only way to restore its sovereignty , territorial integrity and stability . we have been calling for an immediate ceasefire between lebanese hezbollah and israel , and a political plan that will enable civilians on both sides to return to their homes . nobody wants further escalation , and we will continue to work with partners across the region on that . these new regulations will increase the pressure on iran ’s defence industry . they will disrupt iran ’s production of uavs and missiles that could be supplied to proxies in the middle east or russia . we will continue to work with likeminded partners . the regulations send a clear message to the government of iran and those seeking to harm the uk ’s security and that of our partners : we will not stand idle in the face of this aggression . i commend the regulations to the house . question put and agreed to . resolved , that the iran ( sanctions ) ( amendment ) regulations 2024 ( si , 2024 , no . 944 ) , dated [ relevant document : house of commons commission , independent expert panel : nomination of candidates , hc 282 . ] i beg to move , that , in accordance with ( 1 ) sir adrian fulford be appointed as chair of the independent expert panel ; and ( 2 ) lyndsey de mestre , andrew hoyle and wendy williams cbe be appointed as members of the independent expert panel . the motion , which stands in my name , nominates a new chair and three new members of the independent expert panel . the iep was established in 2020 to hear appeals and determine sanctions in bullying , harassment and sexual misconduct complaints against current and former mps . in 2022 the iep ’s remit was expanded to include hearing appeals from the committee on standards . the iep has eight members , appointed following fair and open competition . the commission ’s report of before turning to the new members , i would like to thank the outgoing chair , sir stephen irwin , and the outgoing members , lisa ball , johanna higgins and clare mcglynn , for their service to the house . with their colleagues , and under sir stephen ’s leadership , they have created — from scratch — a body that i know is widely respected across the house for its rigour , fairness and independence . sir stephen will be especially greatly missed by those who have worked closely with him for his wise counsel , generosity , and commitment to changing the culture in this place for the better . a measure of the esteem in which the iep is now held is the quality of the candidates that it has attracted to join it . the nominee for chair , sir adrian fulford , had a long and distinguished judicial career culminating as vice - president of the court of appeal criminal division , as well as being the first investigatory powers commissioner and being elected to the international criminal court in 2003 . many in the house will know wendy williams cbe from her review of the windrush scandal , but she also brings her experience as one of his majesty ’s inspectors of constabulary and fire & rescue services . lyndsey de mestre kc has extensive experience in chairing professional disciplinary panels covering the clergy , police and the bar as well as being the chancellor for the dioceses of york and st albans . dr andrew hoyle is currently an assistant director in fitness to practise at the general medical council . in combination with the continuing members of the panel , these appointments will ensure that the iep continues to have the range of skills and experience to ensure that the house and parliamentary community can have confidence in its rigour , independence and fairness . i hope that members will support the motion , and i commend it to the house . i call the shadow leader of the house . i will not detain the house long , members will be delighted and relieved to hear — i can see that is a popular position . i simply echo the sentiments that the leader of the house expressed . the independent expert panel obviously plays an extremely important role in scrutinising allegations of misconduct , and it is right that there is an independent mechanism to do that , free from political interference . i add my thanks to the thanks that the leader of the house has expressed already to the outgoing members , and in particular to sir stephen , the inaugural chair of the iep . i add my commendation for the newly nominated members . as the leader of the house has said , sir adrian fulford is an extremely distinguished , very senior member of the judiciary , and the other three members being appointed have extremely impressive professional and legal backgrounds as well . i particularly add my endorsement to wendy williams , who i worked with at the home office when i was minister of state for police and crime and she was one of his majesty ’s inspectors of constabulary and fire & rescue services . she certainly discharged those duties with great effectiveness , as i saw during my time as a minister in that department . i am only too pleased to endorse the remarks that the leader of the house has made . question agreed to . resolved , that , in accordance with ( 1 ) sir adrian fulford be appointed as chair of the independent expert panel ; and ( 2 ) lyndsey de mestre , andrew hoyle and wendy williams cbe be appointed as members of the independent expert panel . i beg to move , that , for the remainder of the current session of parliament , the following amendment to in paragraph ( 2 ) , insert “ ( d ) serious long - term illness or injury ; ” . under the standing order , members are currently eligible for a proxy vote in the event of childbirth , care of an infant or newly adopted child , complications related to childbirth , miscarriage or baby loss , or risk - based exclusion from the parliamentary estate . however , the temporary arrangements related to proxy votes for members suffering from long - term or serious illness expired at the end of the last parliament . i therefore tabled this motion to reinstate eligibility for proxy votes to members with long - term illness or injury until the end of the current session . permanent changes to the rules governing the house must be introduced with due care , and it is important for us to ensure that the right balance is struck . before asking the house to consider making these arrangements permanent , i have asked the new chair of the procedure committee , my hon . friend i hope that members will support the motion , and i commend it to the house . once again , i find myself in agreement with the leader of the house on the substance of this issue . perhaps it will become a habit ; i do not know . the opposition support the intention behind the motion . clearly , if a member of parliament has a serious long - term illness or injury , it is reasonable that that member can still exercise his or her vote even if absent . however , i should like to know how the threshold will be defined . who decides whether a particular member has or has not met the threshold , and what sort of evidence will be required ? might it be , for instance , a doctor ’s certificate ? that may be the kind of question that the procedure committee will answer . i should be interested to know the thoughts of the leader of the house on those specific practical questions , but in principle we support this change . i shall not detain the house for long . i welcome the motion . the house proved itself when members were experiencing adverse circumstances because of covid and all the associated problems : it stepped up and made sure that members had the opportunity that they ought to have to use their franchise . it is only right that , in a new session , this arrangement should be extended for a five - year period . i think we should be demonstrating that ours is a kind workplace , and i think what the leader of the house said has shown that it is . some of us are bound to be under pressure sometimes , whatever that pressure may be , and it is good to know that we can go and have a chat with someone who can help us to get through the process . the house enables us to do that , and i commend what the leader of the house has done . i thank the shadow leader of the house for his comments and , as ever , i thank the shadow leader of the house asked some important questions about issues that i have , in fact , asked the chair of the procedure committee to consider further . requiring notes from consultant - level doctors about reasons for absence is fairly onerous . there are certain illnesses that fall into the category , and questions have been raised in the past by members and others about how some of those decisions have been reached , so i think it important that we maintain this option . i certainly did not want a situation where a member undergoing treatment for cancer , for example , was unable to apply for a proxy vote . i think it right for the procedure committee to consider exactly how this should be delivered in the long term , and permanently , to ensure that in circumstances when we would all feel it fair for someone to be eligible for a proxy vote , that person is given one , and that in circumstances when many of us would feel it a stretch for someone to be given a proxy vote , they do not get it . i think we need a short review of the arrangements to ensure that we proceed with confidence and on a permanent basis . question put and agreed to . motion made , and question put forthwith ( that the draft human fertilisation and embryology ( amendment ) regulations 2024 , which were laid before this house on question agreed to . 6.20 pm i rise to present a petition concerning the closure of the natwest angel edmonton branch . the closure will significantly impact the local economy as many businesses have relied on its services for years . additionally , it will further marginalise those who are digitally excluded . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to take action to protect face - to - face banking services , halt the decline of bank branches and ensure banking services remain accessible to all . following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of edmonton and winchmore hill declares that petitioners have significant concerns about the proposed closure of the natwest branch in angel edmonton and its impact on reducing access to face - to - face banking services locally and leaving workers at risk of redundancy ; notes that the government is a significant stakeholder in natwest ; further notes that the closure of bank branches especially impacts older and disables people , those who are digitally excluded without access to internet banking and small business owners ; and further declares that this can make it harder for many people to manage their finances at a time when millions of families are already struggling to make ends meet . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urge the government to act to protect face - to - face person banking services , ensure that the decline in banks can be stopped and even reversed and that accessibility to banking services is kept accessible to all . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p003012 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(vicky foxcroft . ) i am grateful to have this opportunity to address the house on an issue of pressing concern in my constituency . persistent and serious patterns of antisocial behaviour have a profound impact on communities . i will talk about the nature of these challenges , the admirable patience and resilience of my constituents in the face of these issues , the strong leadership demonstrated by our local council and police , and how the government ’s plans will be instrumental in turning the tide . at the outset , i want to express my gratitude to the minister for her attention to these matters , her willingness to engage with me last week and her offer of a further meeting to give me confidence that we can make progress on some of the difficult issues that i will outline today . i must also take this moment to commend the exceptional leadership shown by waltham forest council leader grace williams , kam rai at redbridge council , superintendent claire mccarthy and chief superintendent dan card . they are leading the charge in keeping these issues from becoming even more severe , and i am confident that with continued support we can make real progress . the problems i am going to raise are the manifestation of 14 years of underinvestment in the police , the decimation of our council services , a funding model that does not recognise the disproportionate population growth in east london boroughs and a criminal justice system that is feeding people back into our communities without rehabilitation . turning to the specific challenges , it is essential to understand that antisocial behaviour is more than a series of isolated incidents . it is often concentrated in areas of deprivation and exclusion , such as the avenue road estate in leytonstone . here , we are seeing a tragic cycle of drug misuse , criminality and social breakdown that threatens to undermine the fabric of our community . public spaces are being vandalised , bins are being set on fire , and needles and drug litter are being left where children can find them . users are shooting up and smoking crack in full public view . they are forcing entry to use drugs in people ’s front gardens and communal hallways and stairways , where residents have to get past them . residents are seeing drug users having sex in public spaces or lying unconscious . it is incredibly distressing , particularly for residents with young families . public spaces , including parks and playgrounds , are becoming unsafe due to open drug use and vandalism . despite these troubling conditions , the residents of these areas have shown incredible tolerance and dignity . first , may i commend the hon . gentleman for securing this debate ? he referred to public parks , playgrounds and main streets as places where antisocial behaviour takes place . it is taking place in my constituency and i want to add to this debate by saying what we did . we had community police officers on the street and we also have an organisation called street pastors ; it is very active and it involves all the churches coming together voluntarily to try to engage with those on the streets who might cause some of the antisocial behaviour . those two objectives of more community police and more street pastors seems to have reduced the large number of antisocial behaviour issues in my constituency . i am trying to be helpful in this debate — i always try to be constructive — and hopefully that is something the hon . gentleman will think about . i thank the hon . gentleman for his intervention . as he will learn , a number of schemes have aimed to tackle antisocial behaviour in the community . however , the size of the problem tends to bubble up , and i will come on to that . residents who speak up for their right to live in peace in their own community face serious intimidation , harassment , verbal abuse and threats . many have told me that they fear that violence will be next . it is vital that we recognise and appreciate their tolerance . it is not only that residents are enduring such problems ; the viability of the estate itself is questionable , and the council ’s inability to regenerate the area contributes to their marginalisation . their lack of opportunities further adds to the problem . residents tolerate antisocial behaviour with remarkable respect and humility , and a sense of self - worth . however , their patience must not be mistaken for complacency or acceptance . they deserve solutions , and i hope the minister will tell us how the government ’s approach to tackling antisocial behaviour will provide the framework we need . i am sure that this is something on which the council will continue to actively engage with residents , including at the meeting later this month , so that i can communicate back to them . my hon . friend is making an excellent speech . he is speaking very powerfully from his experience of deeply troubling issues in his constituency . other mps , including me , have experienced similar issues in our own constituencies , and i pay tribute to residents who endure terrible asb problems . the government are doing excellent work on this issue , and i look forward to much more action coming forward , such as the introduction of new orders , other powers and more police community support officers . my hon . friend is right to point to the importance of residents working with local authorities and the police . may i commend the residents in reading town centre who recently removed several tonnes of rubbish in a massive community clear - up , which is part of the work to tackle asb in the area ? i thank my hon . friend for his apposite intervention . people in both our constituencies have tolerated 14 years of failure , and 14 years of all our systems and services being significantly eroded . that is why it is imperative that the minister explains to us how she will go about addressing the issues that are faced , and tolerated , by our constituents . i know that the minister will understand just how damaging these issues can be for our communities . when there is a sense that people are damaging others with impunity , fear and mistrust can escalate . i have met the ward officer teams locally , and they are aware of the problems and keen to support the residents affected , but no matter how attentive they are , the persistence of these issues erodes trust in the police , which is already in a bad way across many areas of london . the reality is that few residents attend the ward panels and raise their voices , partly because they are afraid of being seen engaging with the police , and partly because they have little trust that effective action will be taken . residents have told me that they now feel like drug users have taken over the territory . they are scared to go out at night and almost feel as though they are squatters and intruders , even in their own homes , estates and neighbourhoods . i am pleased to support the government ’s plans to place 13,000 more neighbourhood police and pcsos on the streets as part of the neighbourhood policing guarantee . this will be a game changer for leyton and wanstead , where our overstretched resources have left communities feeling abandoned . the additional officers have a clear local mandate and will bring a much - needed visible presence to our streets , rebuilding trust and confidence in the police . i also want to highlight the government ’s proposed respect orders , which will be crucial in empowering the police to take stronger action against the persistent offenders who make life unbearable for the ordinary resident . by addressing the small groups of individuals responsible for much of the antisocial behaviour , we can restore public spaces and ensure that they are safe for families once again . i would therefore be grateful for any more light that the minister can shed on the respect orders that the secretary of state has rightly proposed . in leyton and wanstead , we are already seeing positive examples of multi - agency working , including initiatives such as project adder , which focuses on tackling antisocial drug - related crime in hotspot areas . it has been demonstrated that when resources are properly targeted , they can make a difference . last year , there was an operation focused on the grove green area of my constituency . the data shows that it worked , with a steep and sustained 75 % fall in drug - related reports in the hotspot area from the peak in the previous year . however , due to its apparent success , the operation was then wound down and the resources were reprioritised . sadly , i believe that the groups of drug users and the criminals who supply them have not really gone away ; they have dispersed to a somewhat larger area . it may be reported that drug - related offending and asb in leyton and wanstead have not yet increased back to where they were last year , but that is not how it feels to our residents . that is perhaps down to two factors . first , the multi - agency action that has been taken clearly dispersed the activities away from the hotspot around grove green to a range of smaller areas , particularly in south leytonstone . secondly , i fear that in some cases residents no longer believe that reporting will lead to a long - term solution . we have to change that , so i am engaging closely with all the affected agencies and residents ’ groups to try to rekindle the hope that solutions can be found . the success of initiatives such as project adder shows that we are on the right track , but the work must be sustained . the long - term commitment of resources and multi - agency collaboration will be vital in breaking the cycle of addiction and criminality that traps individuals and destabilises communities . i would also like to address the challenges that we face in reporting and responding to these issues . too often , the distinction between antisocial behaviour and crime is blurred , leading to confusion about what should be reported and to whom . it is a particular issue where organised criminal networks seem to be involved . residents describe it as living like they are in “ the wire ” , because there is obvious co - ordination between drug users who know each other well . they report users posting lookouts on the streets and in upstairs windows to identify police and asb teams and cover up the evidence before they can act . as we know , these gangs do not just fuel addiction , self - destruction and antisocial behaviours . they are also involved in further crimes , including shoplifting , violent robberies and burglaries and the selling of stolen goods alongside the drugs . residents are understandably cautious about making reports , fearing retaliation ; some of our current reporting mechanisms inadvertently put them at risk . we must improve communication channels and ensure that reporting is safe and effective . i know that the minister is committed to this . i would welcome any updates on how we can better support residents who want to help but fear the consequences . we must also consider the impact of police abstractions on local communities . the significant amount of officer time diverted to central london for public order duties is placing immense pressure on our local services . in waltham forest alone , over 26,000 hours of officer time were unavailable in our neighbourhoods because of abstractions to aid with central policing duties . whenever there is an abstraction , community response is the first thing to go , because 999 responses are rightly prioritised above all else . in some periods during the summer , some wards had no community response officers because the level of abstractions was so consistently high . although i fully support the right to peaceful protest in a safe environment , the impact on local policing is unsustainable . i urge the minister to review the system , especially as our neighbourhoods bear the brunt of such abstractions . we need to be honest with residents that these problems will not go away unless the resources are in place to sustain multi - agency working over a long time . we need the council to be able not just to identify when a vacant flat has been broken into and used as a drug den , but to take possession , put security in place , make repairs and then get that home to one of the decent families who deserve it and desperately need it . we also need the police to be able to escalate ; to focus on organised crime links , when they are there ; and to effectively disrupt and break down the criminal forces that trap drug users in addiction , generate antisocial behaviour and create such fear in our communities . we need to deliver on our commitments to tackle the housing crisis and drive forward economic growth that reduces poverty , creates more opportunities to get on in life and brings hope back to our communities . we need to repair our public services and economy after 14 years of conservative failure , chaos and destruction . we need to divert ordinary users who are not yet caught up in gangs and ensure that they have multiple consistent , genuine routes to take back control over their lives and seek positive change . the people of leyton and wanstead are resilient and committed to their communities . they deserve a future in which they feel safe in their homes and public spaces . with the government ’s investment in neighbourhood policing , stronger penalties for antisocial behaviour and more targeted approaches to drug - related crime , i believe we can make significant progress . i will continue to work closely with local leaders , the police and the minister to ensure that we deliver the solutions that my constituents desperately need . i congratulate my hon . friend i know my hon . friend ’s constituency a little and have spent a bit of time there . i know what an attractive part of east london it is , with many shops , restaurants and bars and a strong and vibrant community , so it is really concerning to hear what he says about the levels of antisocial behaviour . it is absolutely right that that is put in the context of 14 years of under - investment in local councils and public services . antisocial behaviour affects all our constituencies and has far - reaching consequences . it was good to hear the experiences of i want to start by saying unequivocally that any form of antisocial behaviour is unacceptable . it is not merely a low - level nuisance ; it hits the poorest and most vulnerable communities hardest . if left unchecked , it leads to far more serious offending , which is why cracking down on antisocial behaviour is a top priority for this government and a key part of our safer streets mission . this government will ensure that we restore public trust in policing and local partners to tackle antisocial behaviour and create real , impactful change . i turn to recent trends in antisocial behaviour . the crime survey for england and wales shows that in the year ending march 2024 , 35 % of respondents personally witnessed or experienced antisocial behaviour in their local area . as my hon . friend the member for leyton and wanstead described in reference to his area , that includes groups hanging around on the streets , vehicle - related asb and people using or dealing drugs . those were the most common types of antisocial behaviour reported . sadly , that figure has gradually risen by 7 % in the past decade . we must aim to reduce those statistics significantly through the consistent joined - up work of police and local partners . i was pleased to hear about the local leadership provided by the police and the council in my hon . friend ’s constituency , and how that was working well . as my hon . friend will know , this government have committed to five core missions that seek to address some of the fundamental challenges society will face over the next 10 years . the safer streets mission will tackle serious crime : it will halve violence against women and girls , halve knife crime , and restore confidence in policing and the criminal justice system . it is focused on addressing both harm and confidence in parallel , by taking a whole - system approach . tackling antisocial behaviour is at the heart of the safer streets mission . it will rebuild confidence through the investment in neighbourhood police officers , who will be at the forefront of the fight against antisocial behaviour . the past decade has seen a decline in neighbourhood policing to such an extent that many of the bonds of trust and respect between the police and local communities have sadly been lost . we are going to bring back neighbourhood policing , ensuring that thousands of additional officers are out patrolling in our town centres and communities as part of our mission to make the streets safer . through the new neighbourhood policing guarantee , we will ensure every community has a named police officer to turn to . we also want to ensure neighbourhood policing is protected . i note very carefully what my hon . friend said about levels of abstraction and how that can affect neighbourhood policing . we recognise that no single agency can reduce antisocial behaviour alone . achieving the goal we have set ourselves will rely on the police , local authorities , charities and the health service working effectively together . there are lots of examples across the country where that already happens . agencies at the local level are best placed to understand what is driving the behaviours in question and the impact it is having , and to determine the most appropriate response . we will legislate to ensure that antisocial behaviour powers are as effective as they need to be to tackle repeat offending . i reflect on the fact that under the coalition government we saw a downgrading in the antisocial behaviour powers available to the police and councils . my hon . friend talked about the government ’s plans to introduce respect orders to help ensure that persistent adult antisocial behaviour offenders are banned from public areas where they are causing harm to communities . these changes are long overdue . i look forward to further addressing the house about respect orders in the months to come . i want to talk about victims of antisocial behaviour and refer to the recently published report by the victims ’ commissioner , baroness newlove , called “ still living a nightmare ” . the helpful and insightful report looked at the experiences of victims of persistent antisocial behaviour , and highlighted a number of recommendations for the government , including on improving the identification of persistent antisocial behaviour , support for victims and improved utilisation of the antisocial behaviour case review . as we know , the case review gives victims the right to request a review of their case and brings agencies together to take a joined - up approach to finding a solution for the victim . it is vital that we enhance collaboration and communication between statutory agencies to create a holistic approach to dealing with antisocial behaviour . i am carefully considering baroness newlove ’s recommendations and what more we can do to support victims of antisocial behaviour . i was particularly struck by what my hon . friend said about how members of his community do not feel safe to report issues and about how they feel that the drug dealers have taken over their streets and are in control . that worries me a great deal , and it worries me especially that people do not feel safe to report , because reporting on issues is just so important . i wish to say something about drugs , because my hon . friend talked a lot about the problems around drugs . again , tackling those problems is not something policing can do on its own . i recognise that tackling illegal drugs must be a key part of delivering the government ’s mission to make our streets safer . we know from the crime survey for england and wales that people using or dealing drugs is in the top three antisocial behaviour issues that residents most commonly think is a problem in their area . i was particularly concerned to hear about what was happening on the avenue road estate . it is clear that half of all crimes , such as shoplifting and burglary , are driven by drugs , which is why the government are determined to crack down on antisocial behaviour and drug misuse . the police have a critical role to play in this area . where individuals are found in possession of drugs , they must face appropriate sanctions . we are working with the police and the national police chiefs ’ council to support voluntary referrals into treatment . we firmly believe that diverting those who use illegal drugs into interventions such as drug treatment services is key to reducing drug misuse , drug - related crime and reoffending . we support the use of drug testing on arrest and out - of - court resolutions to ensure that individuals who commit drug and related offences are given the opportunity to change their behaviour and to be diverted into meaningful and appropriate interventions . i was pleased to hear from my hon . friend about project adder , which we know expanded to waltham forest in march this year . he also told us that the police in leyton are using powers to tackle drug misuse and related offending . through project adder , police in waltham forest are using proactive operations to close county lines and disrupt organised criminal gangs . i also noted what my hon . friend said about operations that seem to work in one area , but when resources are moved on , people resume the activities in which they were previously engaged , so i am very well aware that we need to address that . i also note that leyton is piloting community protection notices , which will include , in appropriate cases , a new mandatory positive requirement for individuals to attend drugs awareness programmes to tackle drug - related antisocial behaviour . that means that the police and local authorities can require that attendance to change behaviour , and if the individual does not attend , that can result in an arrest . beyond enforcement , we know that treatment works to reduce reoffending . giving offenders greater access to treatment services helps to break the underlying causes of their reoffending and increases public safety . we are committed to ensuring that anyone with a drug problem can access the help and support that they need , and we recognise the need for evidenced - based , high - quality treatment . prevention of drug and alcohol - related harm is vital to saving lives and making our streets safer . i am delighted that the public health minister , my hon . friend i will conclude by repeating how grateful i am to my hon . friend the member for leyton and wanstead for bringing this debate to the house . antisocial behaviour is a key issue for this government , and we have a very ambitious programme to make our streets safer , restore neighbourhood policing — the bedrock of policing in this country — and reduce the misery that antisocial behaviour causes for victims and communities . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . the secretary of state went to the international summit with the first and deputy first ministers and they are all working together on this . the ballymena bus manufacturer , wrightbus , recently signed a deal worth £ 100 billion to supply more than 1,000 buses to go - ahead . that shows real business confidence in northern ireland . we are also focusing on the skills gap . i have met wonderful skills providers across northern ireland to talk about how we can get people into well - paid jobs and to achieve faster growth . i am really sorry to hear the plight of shropshire farmers . we inherited the flood defence programme in disrepair , and thanks to 14 years of mismanagement and failure , communities are unprotected and families and businesses are forced to pay the price . we launched a flood defence taskforce to turbocharge the delivery and co - ordination of flood defences , and we are investing £ 1.5 billion this year to scale up flooding national resilience . i will ensure that the hon . lady gets a meeting with the minister . it is an honour to make my maiden speech , particularly on this critically important debate on the infected blood scandal . i ask the house to allow me a temporary shift in tone , so that i can celebrate the community that sent me here . like many hon . members ’ constituencies , the constituency i have the privilege to represent , leeds north west , is a new seat with a long history . i am sure most members know where leeds is , but i describe it as being right at the heart of the uk . i am deeply grateful to the thousands of voters who have put their trust in me , and as i said on election night , regardless of how they voted , i am determined to represent and serve our community in this place . i begin by paying tribute to my immediate predecessors , both of whom are still members of this house . i thank leeds north west has an incredible history . the stunning norman church in adel dates back to the 12th century ; it is where my parents were married , where i was christened , and where my grandfather lies at rest . further west is otley chevin . members may not yet have had the chance to visit otley chevin , but we would not be here without it . the stone from the chevin provided the foundations for this very parliament when it was rebuilt in the 1840s . it should not be a surprise that it is yorkshire that keeps this house grounded . in leeds north west , our feet are always planted firmly on that bedrock , but our eyes remain on the horizon , ready to embrace the future . our constituency is a vibrant hub of entrepreneurship and creativity , a legacy that continues to thrive today . abraham moon in guiseley , a fabric company established in 1837 , still supplies international fashion houses today , while emis — which began in the 1980s in horsforth — now flourishes in beautiful rawdon as the leading provider of data support to the nhs . we are home to west yorkshire ’s only airport , leeds bradford , and i was pleased to meet with jet2 ’s chief executive officer steve just this week to discuss how the aviation sector can innovate to decarbonise . should members wish to stop for a bite to eat , they should look no further than the thriving bars and restaurants of vibrant horsforth . it is a constituency bursting with joyful community fairs and fetes , from guiseley festival to yeadon carnival and from rawdon summer gala to the arthington and bramhope shows — that last one comes complete with a human fruit machine . there is no stronger pride than yorkshire pride , and our community spirit is a great source of strength . however , as in many places , people are feeling overwhelmed and concerned about their future and that of their children and grandchildren . many of the people i have met on the doorstep also feel let down — let down by politicians and by the institutions they have put their trust in over decades . the infected blood scandal is the most extreme and harrowing example of such systematic failure : people placed their trust in doctors and the government to protect them , and that trust was betrayed . i am proud that this government and this prime minister will introduce a duty of candour law to prevent future cover - ups like the infected blood and post office scandals . i also share deep concerns about the other great challenges facing our community . mental health figures are horrifying . the global mind project has revealed that the uk has the highest rate of mental distress in the world and ranks second worst in overall mental health . people are working harder , yet getting unhealthier and unhappier , and of course , the climate and nature crisis looms . we need things to change ; the country voted for change , and it is change that propelled me into politics . my journey began with the climate crisis . we know that if we get it wrong , we face disaster — particularly for the most vulnerable among us — but if we get it right , we unlock enormous opportunities for our society . in 2003 , i joined the local leeds branch of friends of the earth and launched a campaign for the uk ’s first climate change bill . everyone told me that it was impossible ; that it was too ambitious and too radical . there was no way that the treasury would ever allow a carbon budget — but , friends , they did . we turned that campaign into the fourth most supported campaign in parliament ’s history , with cross - party backing from members across the house . the last labour government turned that bill into an act in 2008 , under my right hon . friend why am i sharing this ? it is because politics must be about real change or it is about nothing . i want to serve our community , and improve our schools , healthcare and public services . when i think about change , i think about my grandmother , marjorie simms . she challenged the status quo . she lived in horsforth in the1950s . there were not that many women driving then , but marjorie did . there were not that many women wearing trousers , but marjorie did . majorie developed breast cancer , and most parents in the 1950s avoided talking to their children , but marjorie showed them her mastectomy so they could understand . she died at 43 , the age i entered parliament . majorie did things differently and her spirit lives on in me . we have seen too much promise and too little delivery in recent years — endless debates about challenges , but a lack of energy for real solutions . politics should be about action , not just words . the seeds of change can be seen within our communities . as a government , our role is to water them and create the conditions for them to flourish . leeds north west is willing to play its role in full . we have the leaders , we have the ideas and we have the “ get stuff done ” attitude that personifies yorkshire — like the students i met recently at ralph thoresby and green meadows or the cadets in my constituency , who are ambitious about the difference we can make ; like the horsforth shed set up a couple of years ago by ex - teachers based on the national men ’s shed model and supporting male mental health , but expanded to include many other vulnerable members of the community ; like those from otley 2030 who decided they wanted to be a beacon of hope and created a living laboratory in the town to create climate friendly and sustainable solutions where people and nature thrive ; and like brian who , after a death in morrisons car park in guiseley , set up defibrillators all over the community so that lifesaving equipment is on hand and there is a network of community activists servicing them . let us not forget the gold medal olympians in our community — the brownlee brothers and the cyclist tom pidcock — who inspire us all with their dedication and achievements . we are indeed a hotbed of world - class talent . people in leeds north west do not wait for change to come to them ; they make it happen . they are the doers and the problem solvers , and i will play my role in that same way . i will champion the green agenda by focusing on practical solutions that carve a british path towards a successful green transition . we will leverage our strengths , whether it is world - leading research , supporting our best business minds , or unlocking the public and private investment needed to turbocharge a green economy . i will support the health of our community — mental health , physical health , community health — and i want to support our entrepreneurs and creativity to grow our region . i promise to be a ferocious champion for my community , my beloved yorkshire and our country , and i will do it with joy . it may recently have become more fashionable across the pond , but i have been measuring with joy for years , and there is always space for a little more joy . finally , i promise to listen , learn and reflect . no one has all the answers , but all of us have some of them . i commit to working constructively and collectively . i will endeavour to arrive with curiosity and non - judgment , because if we want to change the way we do things , we must start in this moment , in this place and with these actions .