the second deputy chairman of ways and means took the chair as deputy speaker ( i beg to move , that the house sit in private . question put forthwith ( the house divided : ayes 0 , noes 37 . question accordingly negatived . bill , not amended in the public bill committee , considered . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . this is the first time , but i sincerely hope not the last time , that i have proposed legislation in this house that has not only enjoyed strong cross - party support throughout all stages of its passage , but strong support outside this place . there has not been a single objection to the bill from the police , local authorities , the public or , which is to be expected , the hospitality industry . in fact , the industry has been asking for this small legislative change for some time now , and it has asked for it because it makes sense . i want to apologise in advance that this speech is a little dull and technical , but it is important that the details of what i am proposing are made clear to the house , a point i discussed at length with love for our pubs is strong across all our constituencies . if there is one thing guaranteed to unite us , it is sporting and royal events . we tend to gather for these events in our local pubs , because they are the beating heart of our communities . as hon . members will know , such events do not always take place when our pubs and hospitality venues are open , which is why the licensing act 2003 makes two provisions for licence extension . first , individual licensed premises can apply to their local authority for a temporary event notice . each application costs £ 21 and takes a minimum of five working days to be approved , although it often takes longer . the provision is not designed for scenarios in which many venues across the country wish to extend their licensing hours at short notice and at the same time , so a second provision , under section 172 of the 2003 act , enables licensing extensions for “ an occasion of exceptional international , national , or local significance ” . that allows the government to make a relaxation order applicable to all premises in england and wales , specifying the dates and times of the relaxation , which can not exceed four days . such orders , which are made under section 197 of the 2003 act , are subject to the affirmative procedure and need approval from both houses of parliament . best practice is for the home secretary to complete a public consultation , and then for both houses to debate the order , which can take up to six months to implement . as mentioned on second reading , the process has been used for the coronation of his majesty the king , the 90th birthday and platinum jubilee of her late majesty , the 2011 and 2018 royal weddings , the 2014 fifa world cup , and the euro 2020 final in 2021 . last summer , our whole country was immensely proud of our lionesses reaching the women ’s world cup final . as hon . members will recall , we found out only four days before the match that our lionesses had made the final . it was taking place on a sunday in sydney , and there was an 11 - hour time difference . the match kicked off at 11 am , with many venues unable to serve alcohol until 11 am or 12 noon . there was no time left for them to apply to their local authority for a temporary event notice and , because parliament was in recess , there was no mechanism for the government to issue an extension . our communities missed out on all the pre - match excitement and much - needed extra revenue . clause 1 will allow the home secretary or ministers to make an extension order in similar situations without going through the costly , overly bureaucratic , time - consuming and restrictive process that exists now . clause 2 simply states that the bill will come into force on the day it gains royal assent , and will extend to england and wales only . the bill does not propose a change to the circumstances with which discretion may be exercised by the home secretary . the provisions in section 172 of the licensing act 2003 , which relate to the length , purpose and consultation requirements of any relaxation order , will remain intact . this is a bill to simplify the parliamentary process , not to change the substance of the licensing act ’s provisions . using the negative procedure instead of the affirmative procedure does not remove parliamentarians ’ voices on applications . as members will know , the majority of statutory instruments are laid before parliament under the negative procedure , and there is a process for objecting to them or having them annulled , both in this place and in the other place . next week , the licensing act 2003 ( uefa european championship licensing hours ) order 2021 is due for debate . like all previous extension orders of this kind , it is very likely that it will pass through both houses unopposed . considering the many problems that our constituents and the country are facing right now , it is a waste of precious parliamentary time to debate an uncontentious order that has such cross - party and public support . i recall spending many hours as a home office minister taking through statutory instruments for exactly this kind of occasion , even though nobody opposed them and everybody could see that they were very good , particularly for the hospitality industry . i declare an interest : my brother is a pub landlord and my father was before him , so i know how much such orders matter . i fully support the hon . lady ’s bill . does she agree that these events are exactly the kinds of times when we need to get together in the great british pub ? i thank the right hon . member for that intervention , and i hope that her family welcome the bill as well . like much of our hospitality industry through covid , pubs were absolutely battered . while this bill is small and will not apply all the time , when it does apply , the revenue that our local hospitality venues and pubs will gain from it will make a huge difference to them . even with my bill , the government fully intend to continue to plan ahead so that , wherever possible , licensing hours extension orders can be brought forward with sufficient time for public consultation and notice , as they have been for the upcoming euros licensing order next week . this bill has received such support because it is straightforward and sensible . i am sure that we all look forward to joining our constituents down one of our brilliant locals in celebrating the next national , sporting or royal event . i commend the bill to the house . i congratulate my hon . friend is absolutely right about moments of celebration in pubs . she represents the cities of london and westminster , and i expect that she has the most pubs in any single constituency . while it may be unfair for her to single out just one , i wonder whether there is a particular sporting occasion , or other occasion of joy , where she has — certainly — enjoyed that in a pub locally . there have actually been far too many to be able to name them . as my right hon . friend says , there are so many amazing venues in my constituency . i think that , at my last count , we had 13,000 licensed premises in westminster alone , and as a former licensing chair of westminster council , the largest licensing authority in the country , i can say with some authority that we have amazing licensed premises here . as the hon . member for south shields says , the alternative to this bill is to go with temporary event notices , which are used for individual businesses looking to extend their hours . i know , from my experience as a licensing chair , that those are a bureaucratic nightmare for licensing authorities — especially for a city centre such as westminster , central manchester , birmingham or wherever — and the £ 21 charge never matches the cost of the administration of those temporary event notices . this bill will do away with that time - consuming bureaucracy . in practice , the blanket extension orders go unopposed , and the public are often in favour of proposed licensing hours extensions . some 85 % of respondents to the consultation were in favour of an extension for this year ’s euros , and 77 % were in favour of one during the king ’s coronation . another important point to make is that there is a massive , vital economic benefit from this bill . pubs and late - night venues in my constituency employ more than 22,000 people and turn over £ 1 billion each year ; it is the no . 1 constituency for turnover , and economic value , from the hospitality industry in the uk . that is just in central london , but pubs and other venues play a vital role in the local economy of every part of the united kingdom . the bill will support them . we know the hospitality industry has had a tough time over the past five years . while i welcome making the process to extend opening hours easier , it is important to remember that such extensions will see an increase in the consumption of alcohol . sadly , often , that will result in an increase in antisocial behaviour and disturbances for residents . the extension order for the 2020 euros final allowed for an extra 45 minutes of serving time . however , for the 2024 euros , the government consultation proposed extending licensing hours by two hours , meaning many pubs will close at 1 am . i am sure everyone in the house agrees that we do not want to see a repeat of what happened during the 2020 euros , when trafalgar square , in my constituency , was the scene of some very unruly behaviour , including excess drinking and revellers climbing on buildings and buses . it was an absolute nightmare . i am aware of residents ’ concerns about the current licensing application for the fanzone for this year ’s champions league final , which will allow up to 20,000 people to gather in trafalgar square and a further 30,000 in victoria embankment gardens . i thank the hon . member for her fulsome support for my bill . i stress to her and to the house that there will be continued consultation with the police and local authorities , even when the regulations in the bill are in play . we are simply changing the parliamentary process , not the process that happens outside this place . i want to give her that assurance . i absolutely accept that point . i just want to take the opportunity to ensure we do not forget that , in my constituency in central london , we have a massive and vital hospitality industry , which employs tens of thousands of people , but we also have residents living cheek by jowl with those premises , many of them in social housing . i visited a social housing block in mayfair last week . people do not expect to see social housing in places like that , but we have social housing in mayfair , belgravia , soho and marylebone , and it is important we do not forget that . the uk should take pride in hosting internationally renowned competitions , such as the euros and the champions league final , and make provision for those seeking to celebrate them . i understand why the government and the greater london authority want to have fanzones , but i am also aware that local councillors , businesses and residents in the st james ’s ward object to the licensing application for the fanzone on the basis that the venue and location are wholly unsuitable . local residents are particularly sad because they feel that there has been a lack of consultation in the process . i note what the hon . member for south shields says about the bill being about the parliamentary process , which is why i support it . in this day and age , it is ridiculous that we have had to have the house of commons and the other place agree to extending licensing hours for an hour , or whatever , just for one day , so i appreciate and support the changes in the bill . however , we have to remember the knock - on effect of extended licensing on the police and local councils . when the licensing hours were extended for the 2020 euros , we saw huge amounts of waste and litter across the west end . westminster city council collected 20 tonnes of waste over 19 hours during and after the historic england versus italy final , with the use of 20 vehicles . as ever , i take my hat off to the cleansing services of westminster city council : they deliver every time we have a major celebration or protest . they clean up and people would never think anything had happened . however , such events put a strain on local authority spending , particularly in westminster , where we are not provided with extra government funding to undertake the cleansing after those special events . again , i know that the metropolitan police spend a lot of time and resources putting in extra police officers to police these events . i note what the hon . member for south shields said . it is crucial that police and local authorities are provided with the guidance and support they need during national celebrations and moments of national significance when licensing hours are extended . for my long - term goal , we need to make sure that residents living close to hospitality venues and those within licensed hours are considered in any extension . i absolutely accept that the consultation system is not changing under the bill , which i welcome . i welcome the bill , which i see as a move to simplify the process of extending licensing hours within the parliamentary process when needed . i look forward to seeing the bill complete its journey through this and the other place . it is a pleasure to stand in support of the bill on third reading . i commend and congratulate the licensing act 2003 was important legislation . the reason for that , as my hon . friend this simple legislative change will not make bureaucracy a thing of the past ; it is important that the appropriate procedures go through . however , we often think about how parliament needs to be in touch with the challenges that people have . it may not be the greatest challenge in the world that a pub can not open longer for a particular event , but when we try to explain to people that the reason such a change can not be made is that parliament is not sitting because it is having a summer break , there is an element of , “ let ’s look at that again . ” that is why the hon . member for south shields was wise to pick up and work with the government on this modest change . on the negative resolution procedure more broadly , within parliament , and in particular the other house , i would say there has been an anti - negative resolutions revolution in the passing of secondary legislation . about 80 % of our regulations are made through the negative route . there will be a variety of reasons as to why it is unpopular for certain aspects , partly because , if people object to those statutory instruments , although there is quite a systematic process , it is not always easy to get a particular vote on it , particularly in this house . one thing it has done is to clog up a lot of parliamentary activity , with more and more time being spent on modest pieces of legislation that really do not need further consideration , apart from the wisdom of discussions or debates that could be had outside of what is quite a formal parliamentary process . that is why i think this matters . i appreciate that my hon . friend the member for cities of london and westminster might not want to single one pub out in her constituency . for what it is worth , i live in her constituency when i am carrying out my parliamentary duties , and i go to the white swan on vauxhall bridge road to watch sport . i think it is really good . it has a fantastic tiktok account . do n’t worry , i am not expecting a free guinness — i would not abuse my position in that way . i had hoped to be having moments of joy this sunday , with liverpool winning the premier league . sadly , that is not going to be the case , and i expect we will end up third , but i am going to a liverpool fans ’ pub in london in the afternoon with some friends . it is that sense of community and of coming together that really matters . covid has had so many impacts on our country : not just the huge amount of investment that was put in , which we are now paying for across the uk , but what it did to community and the anxious generation we now have of people who interact solely on something like this phone — i am using it to look at the legislation today . for me , what is critical is not just drowning our sorrows by going to a pub , but that sense of occasion . i remember the joy of some of the sporting events i have been lucky enough to go to in person . that sort of joy can be replicated , and it need not necessarily be in a pub ; it can be in a community hall or at other sorts of temporary events . however , it is vital , not only for economic reasons , but for genuine societal reasons , that we make it as straightforward as possible for parliament to allow these things to happen . while we still have a moderate amount of regulation in recognising what licensing conditions may apply and what concerns local residents or businesses may have , i come back to my original point : this simple change , meaning that it does not matter whether parliament is sitting , is the key element of this legislation . i am going to be shameless and name a few more pubs in my constituency . i forgot to do so in discussing previous bits of legislation . i even served on the hon . member for south shields ’ bill committee and did not do it . i can not name them all , but i have been to every single pub in my constituency ; that is the reason i won the beer parliamentarian of the year award over a decade ago , and still have the mug to prove it — though i can assure you , mr deputy speaker , there is no beer in the chamber today . but who knows ? we might crack on over in the strangers bar if it is open later , to toast the hon . lady ’s success in getting the bill through this house . we undoubtedly have a lot of events in europe coming up , but it is important to recognise our international community here in this country and people ’s desire not only to watch sports here , of course , but to watch sporting events with their home teams in different parts of the world . i had better not get into too much trouble by naming loads of pubs , but — my right hon . friend is making a very excellent speech . she asked me for my favourite watering hole in my constituency . i think it is only fair , surely , that she names one pub that she went to . of course there is the felixstowe conservative club , which is very good in that regard , but i must admit that when i go to watch sports , i have been to the douglas bader in martlesham heath and i love going to the anchor in woodbridge . my first home was in a village called westleton , where i used to go to the white horse inn a lot . there are just so many . not all of them show football , and i must do better in ensuring that i get down to many more pubs in felixstowe , where that does seem to happen . however , i will continue to champion and go around pubs , and i now have a great excuse , with the hon . member for south shields ’ bill , to explain why parliament is going to make life for our hospitality sector a lot easier . we have a great brewery and pub chain called adnams in southwold in my constituency . adnams still owns a lot of pubs , some managed , some tenanted , and i hope it will take full advantage of this great opportunity . so without further ado , i am really pleased to be here on a friday to support this legislation , i am sure the lords will toast it as well , and i look forward to sharing a glass or two in the strangers bar later today . i am afraid the strangers bar is closed . i am sorry to bring such bad news , but i think the house of lords bar may be open — you never know . i am a former president of the all - party parliamentary group on beer , so i do not think we could have a more appropriate chair for this particular debate . i pay tribute to my hon . friend i also pay tribute to all members who have contributed today and at other stages , particularly i absolutely recognise the issues that the hon . member for cities of london and westminster highlighted about the potential impact on residents of the measures . in inner - london boroughs , as she said , pubs are often close to residential areas . however , as she will know , having spent time on licensing committees , local authorities and police spend a lot of time on ensuring that licences come with conditions in order to prevent such issues . i will acknowledge some of the wonderful pubs in my enfield north constituency , but before i do , let me say that it has been a pleasure to see the bill pass through this house with cross - party support . as we have heard , the bill amends section 197 of the licensing act 2003 , granting our hospitality sector more freedom to extend licensing hours with shorter notice , and giving the government of the day the ability to respond to the needs of the industry . that would allow our communities to celebrate events of national significance in hospitality venues for longer , providing a welcome boost to businesses and fans . as we have heard , when our lionesses progressed in australia and new zealand to reach england ’s first world cup final since 1966 , there was a missed opportunity at home , where progress stalled . pubs , bars and restaurants could open from 10 am on the day of the final , but could not serve customers until 11 . licensing hours were not extended , despite requests , because parliament was in recess , so it was too late . businesses missed the opportunity to serve customers early , and supporters were denied the chance to get behind their team . with england and scotland set for the european championships , another busy summer of sport will provide a welcome boost to our hospitality sector , which has suffered so much over the past few years . if football is to come home again this summer , we must ensure that our hospitality sector is ready to embrace it . i know that the bill will not solve all the problems facing the industry , but it will provide the sector with the welcome boost that it is asking for . from speaking to those at the many pubs in my enfield north constituency , including the plough , the wonder and the cricketers — where i go every sunday with my children — i know that they support the proposals in the bill . let us be clear : our hospitality sector brings a huge boost to the uk economy . in 2022 alone , it generated £ 54 billion in tax receipts and £ 7 billion - worth of business investment . clearly , what benefits our pubs benefits local communities , but the impact goes much further : a staggering 42 % of tourists want to visit a pub when visiting the uk . they are a vital part of our communities , high streets and households . i know that many members present today will share that view , yet we are currently denying pubs , bars and restaurants the full opportunity to benefit . it is clearly an opportunity , so for the reasons set out today , the bill should progress . the negative resolution procedure would allow an order to be debated if successfully requested by any parliamentarian , and the option of consultation would be retained , meaning that concerns will be considered , so relative safeguards are in place . it is common sense that the bill should proceed , and i am delighted to support it and my colleague , my hon . friend the member for south shields , today . i start by congratulating i congratulate the hon . lady on marshalling both sides of the house behind her bill , and i thank the members who have spoken today . i thank the shadow minister , as we have heard , this bill amends section 172 of the licensing act , which already makes provision for the secretary of state to make orders relaxing licensing hours in england and wales on occasions of exceptional international , national , or even local significance . under that definition — international , national and local significance — tomorrow is the play - off final at wembley between oxford united and bolton wanderers . would that qualify under the changes in the bill , and since the play - off is tomorrow , can the minister make sure that all parts of the bill have completed their passage by that time ? my hon . friend will have noticed that the second and final clause of the bill states that the act will come into force on the day on which it is passed , but of course it has to complete its passage through the other place first , so unfortunately , i do not think that play - off final will benefit from these provisions . whether a play - off final between such auspicious teams as bolton wanderers and oxford united would qualify as an event under this bill would be for the home secretary of the day to determine . in all seriousness , although the parliamentary mechanism is being changed from the affirmative resolution procedure to the negative resolution procedure , the underlying criteria are not changing ; i do not think we would want to usher in a wholesale change of licensing hours through this mechanism . the threshold is quite high and it is used fairly rarely , so i would like to temper expectations . we do not expect the provisions to be used indiscriminately , although that in no way detracts from the importance of the game taking place at wembley — obviously i wish both teams the best of luck . these orders will benefit businesses , as we have heard , allowing them to stay open for longer when important events are taking place . as my hon . friend the member for cities of london and westminster said , it is much easier to use blanket licensing extensions than to require pubs to go through the onerous , expensive and tedious process of applying for a temporary event notice from their local authority . this approach is much better . to give a flavour of the kind of events that might qualify for these provisions , they might include things such as his majesty the king ’s coronation last year , her late majesty the queen ’s 90th birthday and her platinum jubilee , the royal weddings in 2018 and 2011 , and the euros final in 2020 . if anyone is wondering whether the bill will apply to future england appearances in finals , let me say that , while that might be more in hope than expectation , we should none the less legislate in hope . we have already heard members set out the reasons why we should make this change , which has commanded widespread support . we have heard that such games can often arise at relatively short notice — for example , england reaching the final , which has been referred to . when parliament is not sitting , it is obviously not possible to use the affirmative resolution procedure , although let me be clear : even with the negative resolution procedure , scrutiny is possible . where necessary , it is possible to pray against resolutions made under the negative procedure , so if a member feels strongly , they can obviously pray against the instrument in the normal way . as minister for crime and policing , i am obviously aware of how important it is to consult the police regularly and make sure that they are happy that , where we extend licensing hours , that will not cause any undue problems with public order . it is important that the home secretary of the day consults the police appropriately to make sure that risk is considered , but i am sure that will not stop the power being used when appropriate . as i have said , the power in section 172 of the licensing act 2003 has been used relatively sparingly , and that approach is not going to change . the test is an event of exceptional significance , which imposes quite a high bar . to make just one final point , for the avoidance of doubt , this instrument applies only in england and wales , because it amends the licensing act 2003 , which applies only to england and wales . licensing is devolved in scotland and northern ireland , which i assume explains why there are no members from either scotland or northern ireland joining us this morning to hear about all the pubs in the constituencies of the various members who have spoken — in which context , i should commend the pubs in croydon south , such as the fox in coulsdon and the wattenden arms up by kenley airfield . [ interruption . ] of course , there is a member from scotland sitting right behind me , who i did not notice . the minister is making an excellent speech . i , too , give my wholehearted support to the bill , on behalf of pubs across scotland and in my constituency . it might not have a direct impact there , but we recognise its importance right across the united kingdom and the important message it sends , so i thank the minister — and remind him that i am still from scotland . i offer my abject and heartfelt apologies for overlooking my hon . friend , who is sitting right behind me . she is scotland ’s only voice in parliament today , and scotland is all the better off for her presence here — particularly on this side of the house , where she belongs , and where she is very welcome and held in high regard and great affection . there are many bills to get through today , and i do not wish to test the patience of the house or colleagues by speaking for too long . i fear that the most popular words in any speech i give are the words “ and finally , ” so — and finally i thank once again the hon . member for south shields , who has piloted the bill through commons , and those who have spoken in support of it and served on the bill committee . this straightforward and simple measure will free up valuable parliamentary time , as we heard earlier , and allow the government to respond in an agile way in what i hope is the likely event that teams from the home nations make progress in various international sporting events , meriting an extension to the licensing hours of this nation ’s fine pubs . i commend the bill to the house . as i said on second reading , i get my love of the pub from my dad , who knows a good pint when he sees one , and from my mam , whose footsteps i followed in as an excellent barmaid . people who work in this industry deserve our support , and our communities deserve every opportunity they can get to come together for important events . i give special thanks to i have many more people to thank : the minister , question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time , and passed . cheers to you , emma lewell - buck . consideration of bill , not amended in the public bill committee i beg to move amendment 1 , page 1 , line 22 , leave out from “ force ” to end of line 23 and insert — “ at the end of the period of four months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ” this amendment would bring the provisions of the bill which extend to england and wales and scotland , and section 1(5 ) which extends to england and wales and scotland and northern ireland , into force four months after royal assent . with this , it will be convenient to discuss the following : amendment 4 , page 2 , line 1 , leave out from “ force ” to end of line 2 and insert — “ at the end of the period of four months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ” this amendment would bring the provisions of the bill which extend only to northern ireland into force four months after royal assent . amendment 2 , page 2 , line 5 , leave out subsection ( 7 ) this amendment is consequential on amendment 1 . amendment 5 , page 2 , line 7 , leave out subsection ( 8) . this amendment is consequential on amendment 4 . amendment 3 , page 2 , line 10 , leave out subsection ( 9 ) . this amendment is consequential on amendment 1 . amendment 6 , page 2 , line 12 , leave out subsection ( 10 ) . this amendment is consequential on amendment 4 . i am grateful to my hon . friend i am not in any way trying to detract from the regulator or from the department for work and pensions , of which i was proud to be the secretary of state , but i am particularly conscious about the uncertainty of the timing of a general election . of course there are still procedures that can be done to some extent , but those who have held ministerial office will know some of the challenges that take place in terms of process , procedure , and different cabinet committees . put simply — this is why i am grateful to my hon . friend and to the government for listening to my concerns — the amendments would remove extra steps of process . that matters because i am keen to see the bill enacted . i am not seeking in any way to hold it up . i want certainty about making it happen , and i was concerned about the uncertainty of timing . i was careful to check that the amendments would not affect the legislative consent motion that has already passed the northern ireland assembly . if there is any way that they do , i have not been made aware of that — i have been given the opposite assurance . i am keen to ensure that the united kingdom moves together . we have two formally separate systems . these are transferred powers — they have always been powers for the northern ireland executive and assembly to deal with — but i know that the executive and the assembly have been keen , particularly in social security matters , for the united kingdom to proceed in step so that we do not give different treatment to the same things , especially when we all pay the same tax and we all tend to have the same service providers . after careful consideration , i wanted to ensure that the bill becomes law in a timely fashion , without the need for further process , and that is why i will be pressing my amendments . i thank my right hon . friend i also thank the minister and the government for discussing these issues and coming to an agreement to accept the amendments . i am certainly very happy to accept them . there is no need for me to drag proceedings out any further at this point . i thank all concerned for their work . i rise just to seek some reassurance on the amendments . i am not at all against them in principle — when i read them on the amendment paper , i could understand what although i do not object to what the right hon . member for suffolk coastal is trying to do , i was slightly surprised by the bulldozer approach that the amendments create . in this circumstance it is manageable , but it might not be quite so manageable in other , more complex circumstances . i suppose i seek some reassurance from the minister about the precedent that the amendments will set . how wide will it go ? are we going to start including in bills a precise timetable for when they will be put into effect , with a hard stop , regardless of their complexity ? i understand that i thank my right hon . friend i think we can all agree that we want the provisions in the bill to be commenced with minimal delay . they are important , and will provide much - needed financial support up to six months earlier than is currently the case for those who have received the devastating news that they have a terminal illness . my right hon . friend is clearly mindful of that following her own experience in the dwp , and it is what is driving these changes . they build on the work that the department began in 2022 , under her formidable and inspiring leadership . she will be only too well aware of the importance that the department has placed on doing all that it can to help people at these difficult times . the amendments are intended to ensure that the bill specifies the point at which the provisions will come into force . they provide for this to be a period of four months after the bill has received royal assent . putting the commencement date on the face of the bill would mean that the secretary of state ’s power to make regulations commencing the provisions , or transitional or saving provisions , would no longer be necessary , and amendments 2 , 3 , 5 and 6 seek to remove all those provisions . similar amendments are made to the provisions covering northern ireland , and at this point it may be prudent to remind the house that the northern ireland assembly has already provided a legislative consent order for the bill as drafted . i hope that that reassures my right hon . friend . when the bill was drafted towards the end of last year , it was unclear to the department how quickly the pension protection fund would be able to implement the changes . the decision to commence them via a commencement order gave the department the flexibility to ensure that the fund was in a position to implement the new conditions at commencement , and that the corresponding changes to the financial assistance scheme regulations 2005 could be made at the same time . in committee , the under - secretary of state for work and pensions , my hon . friend “ i can confirm today that the intention is for that to happen as soon as practicable after royal assent . i see no reason for delay or obfuscation . ” – – [ official report , pensions ( special rules for end of life ) public bill committee , hopefully we are all agreed , and can all be assured that we have absolutely no intention of creating any unnecessary delay in enacting these vital measures , which will make a massive difference to people at the most difficult time in their lives , and , indeed , to their families , bringing real comfort . at the end of committee stage on notwithstanding the point made by the hon . member for wallasey , and with that in mind , i see no reason why the department can not meet the new requirement that the amendments will impose , and i have recommended that the government do not oppose them . i thank my right hon . friend for raising her concerns and bringing them to the house in the manner and the style that she did . amendment 1 agreed to . amendments made : 4 , page 2 , line 1 , leave out from “ force ” to end of line 2 and insert — “ at the end of the period of four months beginning with the day on which this act is passed . ” this amendment would bring the provisions of the bill which extend only to northern ireland into force four months after royal assent . amendment 2 , page 2 , line 5 , leave out subsection ( 7 ) this amendment is consequential on amendment 1 . amendment 5 , page 2 , line 7 , leave out subsection ( 8) . this amendment is consequential on amendment 4 . amendment 3 , page 2 , line 10 , leave out subsection ( 9 ) . this amendment is consequential on amendment 1 . amendment 6 , page 2 , line 12 , leave out subsection ( 10 ) — ( dr coffey . ) this amendment is consequential on amendment 4 . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . i am pleased that the bill ’s passage through the house has been relatively smooth , so i thank the government and indeed the opposition for their support . although the bill ’s scope is narrow , it will provide financial assurance to those who have received the devastating diagnosis of a terminal illness and who have also seen the sponsors of their pension schemes become insolvent . the bill will do that by amending the definition of the words “ terminally ill ” . when someone receives the awful news that they may have only months to live , it is only right that financial problems should be the least of their worries . the loss of their rightful pension payments should not mean that they must live out their remaining time constrained by their financial circumstances . the bill aims to address that problem directly . for wider context , the bill focuses on the pension protection fund and the financial assistance scheme . the pension protection fund , established by the pensions act 2004 , pays compensation to individuals when the sponsors of their defined - benefit schemes — usually their employers — become insolvent and lack the necessary assets to pay those pensions to the level that the pension protection fund ordinarily would . that is for cases when such insolvency takes place on or after the pension protection fund provides a one - off lump sum payment to those who receive such a diagnosis , while the financial assistance scheme will begin to make payments to someone at any age . the issue that the bill seeks to address is the definition of a terminal illness . the pension protection fund and the financial assistance scheme both use the same legal definition of terminal illness , which that is that “ a person is ‘ terminally ill ’ at any time if at that time the person suffers from a progressive disease and the person ’s death in consequence of that disease can reasonably be expected within 6 months . ” the same definition was used by the department for work and pensions for the purpose of calculating benefits , but that was reformed in the social security ( special rules for end of life ) act 2022 , where the six - month period included in the definition of “ terminally ill ” was extended to 12 months . the change in definition for these two pension schemes seems only logical . that would keep the definition consistent with making social security payments . it is difficult to say how many people will benefit from the bill , and in reality we do not really want people to benefit as that would mean that the sponsors of their pension funds have become insolvent , which we do not want to see . however , where that is the case , this legislation will benefit terminally ill people . the bill ’s scope is technically limited to the pension protection fund and the financial assistance scheme , but i hope it will encourage any workplace pension that does not have provision for terminal illness , where the member has a life expectancy of 12 months or less , to consider putting such a scheme into place . depending on the scheme ’s rules , many private pension schemes can already make what are called serious ill health payments under tax law , if the member has up to one year to live . the change will be well worth making . the heartbreaking job of giving a terminal illness diagnosis falls to health professionals . modern medicine , surgery , palliative care and the general care provided by our incredible nhs staff make that judgment even more difficult . it is therefore right to extend the definition of terminally ill from the narrow band of six months to the more accommodating threshold of 12 months . that is fairer not only to the ill person but to those who have to make the difficult judgment , especially when those health professionals know that a person ’s pension payments may rest on that . as we just heard , the bill extends throughout the united kingdom , and comes into force in england , scotland and wales four months after royal assent , and likewise in the case of northern ireland . i commend it to the house . it is a pleasure to support my hon . friend in this important change . i commend him on the detail in his speech , which he also displayed in the bill committee , on which i was happy to serve . the bill recognises that regulations have moved on . back in 2022 , the government , with the support of parliament , made changes to social security benefits to align ourselves with what was happening in the nhs . plenty of people who get a terminal illness could find that their lifetime may be longer than six or 12 months . the bill considers particularly where people are diagnosed later , and to accelerate or extend potential benefits . the national health service considers people to be terminally ill when they estimate that they have around 12 months left to live . that is never an easy message to give , or for people to receive . there seems to be very little medical accuracy in getting the timeline right , but that length of time has been well established in the nhs . that is why this is sensible legislation — to align with how the nhs treats patients , as opposed to the somewhat arbitrary 6 months . the reference to the ppf and the financial assistance scheme available will be welcomed by people right across the country . i am keen to see this legislation pass through the commons and the lords at great speed . i wish to begin also by thanking pensions offer individuals peace of mind , knowing that they have a dependable source of income after years of dedicated hard work . as well as alleviating the stress of financial uncertainty in old age , pensions allow retirees to retain their standard of living during retirement . i welcome the bill as it seeks to provide the same opportunity for financial security for those with a terminal illness , and thus offers a more dignified end of life experience in what i can only imagine is an unstable and devastating time for the individual and their families . the bill seeks to extend the definition of terminal illness for the ppf and the fas to 12 months , rather than the current six , to allow those who are eligible to receive vital financial support . i welcome the fact that the bill will bring the ppf and the fas in line with the nhs and department for work and pensions definition of terminal illness , which is 12 months . indeed , thanks to the brilliant work of our nhs and the consistent progress in medical science , it is difficult to predict how long someone is likely to live . in some cases , patients are able to outlive their initial prognosis . that is why the bill is so important . it is also due to our nhs and medical advancements that more and more of us are reaching pensionable age . as we all know , many developed nations are now facing an ageing population as birth rates decline . therefore , the amount of british people accessing their pensions at any one time will steadily increase . in fact , pensioners represent 18.6 % of the population , and 12.5 % of my constituency is 65 and over . the government have done so much to support pensioners . we heard in the autumn statement that the government announced an 8.5 % increase in the state pension , in line with the government ’s initiative : the triple lock . as a result , the new state pension is now worth up to £ 900 more a year and ensures that older people get the support they deserve . those nearing the end of their life deserve to have access to the same level of financial support . it is thanks to the compassionate government that people with terminal illnesses are able to get faster and easier access to certain benefits through the special benefit rules for end of life . recent changes mean that special rules now apply to people who have 12 months or less to live , rather than six . those who are eligible are able to claim universal credit , employment and support allowance , personal independence payment , disability living allowance , and attendance allowance . the bill will simply align the ppf and the fas with those existing provisions , reflecting the government ’s commitment thus far to aiding those nearing the end of their lives . the government have also provided necessary cost of living support worth over £ 1.4 billion . the support includes two rounds of means - tested cost of living payments , disability cost of living payments and pensioner cost of living payments . we have all heard from our constituents the anxiety felt over the cost of living crisis , with rising prices that were caused by the pandemic and putin ’s weaponisation of energy due to his illegal invasion of ukraine . imagine now how the situation would worsen for individuals facing a terminal illness : the cost of heating their home , travelling to medical appointments , and potential childcare costs as their life is turned upside down . marie curie , the charity that does tremendous work in this area , has published an eye - opening report , “ dying in poverty ” , which reveals that on average a pensioner ’s energy bill doubles once they are diagnosed with a terminal illness . i find that incredible and very , very worrying . the report also highlights that people of working age who die are twice as likely to spend their final years of life in poverty , compared with people of pensionable age . that poignant reality demonstrates the crucial need for bills like this one by enabling individuals in these unfortunate circumstances to access their pensions early . the bill addresses the crisis outlined by charities such as marie curie and aims to restore dignity to those affected . i also pay tribute to amazing charities registered in the cities of london and westminster that support those nearing the end of their life : compassion in dying , a national charity that provides advice and information to those at the end of life ; the sunseeker london charitable trust , which provides financial support to organisations dedicated to the care of terminally ill people ; and the bennett kleinwort charitable trust , which provides care and treatment for terminally ill people . the work of these charities plays a crucial role in advancing progress towards addressing the challenges faced by terminally ill individuals , which is also the objective of the bill . once again , i express my support for this bill . i understand that the hope is that it will encourage pension providers that do not currently have provision for serious ill health payments for those with a life expectancy of 12 months or less to consider putting it in place . although the bill may be narrow in scope , i am confident that it is a necessity and will have a wider positive impact . any one of us can be diagnosed with a terminal illness , and it is important that there are provisions in place to offer financial assistance . i commend my hon . friend the member for tewkesbury for bringing forward this admirable bill . i , too , congratulate as the hon . member for tewkesbury highlighted , the bill is narrow in scope and , thankfully , concerns a fairly small number of people , but its impact for that group will be significant , because it will unlock access to a vital lifeline of support when they have received a diagnosis . for that reason , labour supports and welcomes the bill . receiving a terminal diagnosis is devastating , both for the individual themselves and for their family and loved ones . such a diagnosis brings with it a slew a challenges and difficult decisions . as marie curie has also highlighted that , all too often , terminal illness brings with it huge financial burdens and extra costs of between £ 12,000 and £ 16,000 per year for a household . this is the so - called double burden of income loss and the additional costs that a terminal diagnosis can often bring about . it pushes families towards insecurity and fear about their income , and forces them to confront poverty at a time when they have to deal with other insecurities and fears , adding another layer of distress at the hardest of times . those with a terminal illness should not be forced to spend the end of their lives worried about making ends meet , and i am sure that all members would feel a lot happier if not so many of our pensioners found that that is what they face . by opening up eligibility for support , be it through a lump sum payment from the financial assistance scheme or payments through the pension protection fund in the narrow range of circumstances that the hon . member for tewkesbury has rightly identified , this bill will go some way to ease the financial burdens on those who are lucky enough to have a defined benefit pension entitlement , but unlucky enough to have had their pension fund go bust and end up in the pension protection fund . extra access to cash can allow those nearing the end of their life to focus on spending the time they have left with those they love , supported with dignity and respect , which is what i think everyone in this house wants to see . labour welcomes this change , but i question why it has been left to a private member ’s bill , albeit we are very happy to support the glorious achievement of the hon . member for tewkesbury in bringing it forward . we supported the social security ( special rules for end of life ) act 2022 , which amended the dwp ’s definition of terminal illness , for the purpose of social security rules , to less than 12 months to live , raising it from less than six months . it was right to make that change then , but i wonder why more work was not done by the department under the right hon . member for suffolk coastal to check the consistency of those rules when the act was put on to the statute book . if that had been done , we would have had two more years of support for the terminally ill between 2022 and 2024 , and many people would have been helped . i wonder whether any other inconsistencies are lurking in the dwp on the change from six months to 12 months , and whether the minister might trawl through the many bits of legislation and many statutory instruments that deal with such things to see whether any other inconsistencies could be quickly put right . will she commit from the dispatch box to ensuring consistency across all the definitions of terminal illness and , because the move has been made to shift the definition from six months to 12 months , undertake to make certain that there are no other inconsistencies lurking , so that we do not have to do this again with another private member ’s bill to make sure the definition finally lands at 12 months , with no remaining six - month definitions causing inconsistency ? every hour , 10 people die in poverty in the uk , and one in four terminally ill people of working age spends the last year of their life in poverty . the cost of living crisis has acutely affected those who are nearing the end of their life . a terminally ill person ’s energy bill can rise by 75 % after their diagnosis , with critical equipment often sending bills soaring . for example , the cost of energy to run an oxygen concentrator can be £ 65 a month . a dialysis machine can cost £ 27 a month and a ventilator can cost £ 35 a month . very few people wish to be in hospital when they have access to these services but , all too often , it appears that we are leaving them with the cost of running these vital bits of machinery to keep them alive . it is an indictment of 14 years of government failure and neglect of our public services that so many people are spending the end of their life in poverty , struggling to make ends meet and worrying whether they can afford to run the equipment that is keeping them alive . the way our country treats those nearing the end of their life should be a mark of how civilised we are , and i fear that we are not passing that test as well as we should . i finish by repeating my congratulations to the hon . member for tewkesbury on his work on this bill . we fully support its aims , and we hope to see further work in this area . i am very grateful to my hon . friend i thank i thank all members who have taken part in the debates that have led the bill to progress to this stage , including the committee stage , and for the cross - party support it has rightly received . as has been outlined , the bill builds on the 2022 changes the government introduced to social security benefits . that legislation was welcomed by excellent key charities , such as marie curie , the motor neurone disease association and macmillan cancer support . it changed the special rules for a number of benefits , ensuring claims were rightly fast tracked . those who were thought to be in the final year of their life were able to receive vital financial support six months earlier . this week is dementia action week , bringing the uk together to take action on dementia and promoting an understanding of its impact . the alzheimer ’s society and many groups and charities do so much on this important issue . i extend my thanks to them from the dispatch box . by extending the definition of terminal illness from six to 12 months ’ life expectancy for payments under both the pension protection fund and the financial assistance scheme , the bill completes the journey . the bill will mean that members are able to rightly claim compensation on the ground of terminal illness , if a medical professional confirms that they have less than 12 months to live , rather than the current six months . hon . members have spoken about the terrible time that people will be going through and the financial impact . there is often more financial assistance than perhaps people know , if they are not used to being part of the benefits arena . i urge people to look at the benefits calculator at gov.uk and to work with citizens advice , which runs our help to claim service , so that costs can be met and understood at a difficult time . to assure the hon . member for wallasey , in my role as minister for disabled people , health and work , i met with the minister for energy security and net zero , my hon . friend decisions on terminal illness will be made by healthcare professionals , such as clinicians and medical practitioners . we thank them for that great work at such a difficult time , as pointed out by my hon . friend the member for tewkesbury . as we heard during committee stage , the definition will include advanced cancer , dementia , motor neurone disease and other neurological diseases , such as parkinson ’s disease . the changes restore the original policy intent of alignment between the social security special rules , and the pension protection fund and financial assistance scheme terminal illness rules . just as importantly , they bring both schemes in line with the tax definition of serious ill health , which currently allows private pension schemes to make payments when the member has less than 12 months to live . i will briefly reiterate what i said in the earlier debate on the amendments and repeat what the minister for pensions said in committee : it was never our intention to delay the commencement of these provisions . there is no practical reason for us to do so . however , as discussed today , putting a commencement date on the face of the bill will provide certainty around the change at a time when people value certainty , and we will ensure that the provisions can commence four months after royal assent , as signalled . i do not want to detain the house any further . we know that being told you are nearing the end of your life can be a frightening experience not only for the individual concerned , but for their family and their loved ones . this bill , although seemingly small , will have a really positive impact on those whom the provisions cover , at a very difficult time . as with the 2022 act , the bill will ensure that when someone reaches the final stages of life , they will not have those additional financial concerns . receiving a payment at an earlier stage in their final illness will help those people to plan more effectively , providing them with the opportunity to focus on their time with the people who matter to them . this debate gives me the opportunity to thank the st peter & st james hospice , the hospice in the weald , st catherine ’s hospice in pease pottage , those local hospices that i am sure we all have , and those charities mentioned in this debate , who bring real comfort and support in all our constituencies at such difficult times . this bill will help people to live well to the end , with their loved ones and with that comfort . i greatly thank my hon . friend the member for tewkesbury for bringing the bill forward . we all wish it safe and speedy passage through the other place , so that it can reach the statute book and support those who need it , our loved ones and people in our communities , with no undue delay . with the leave of the house , i call laurence robertson . i am pleased to draw this debate to a close by thanking the minister and the opposition for their support , and in particular with regard to setting the date for the commencement of legislation . in that context , i also thank my right hon . friend question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . bill , as amended in the public bill committee , considered . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . it has been a long journey to get this special envoy for freedom of religion or belief bill to this point . i am grateful for the cross - party and public efforts and acknowledge the international interest in it . at the outset , i particularly express my thanks to the foreign secretary , lord cameron of chipping norton , for his personal and vocal support for the bill , including in the other place . it is pertinent that this is a private member ’s bill because , while it implements recommendation 6 of the truro review and is therefore implementing a manifesto commitment , its origins are on the back benches of the commons and the lords . in 2013 , the inaugural report of the all - party parliamentary group for international freedom of religion or belief recognised the challenge for attention and concern for the right to freedom of religion or belief — as in article 18 of the universal declaration of human rights — and described it as “ an orphaned right ” . this bill will ensure that the office of the prime minister ’s special envoy for freedom of religion or belief is secured as a permanent fixture in statute , and will embed the progress that the uk has made in promoting the fundamental and universal human right to freedom of religion or belief around the world . since the all - party parliamentary group first produced that report , it has grown in number to more than 180 parliamentarians . i believe it is the largest all - party group in this place . that reflects the increase in awareness and support for the right of freedom of religion or belief here in the uk , and i am very proud of that . having worked internationally in this role as the prime minister ’s special envoy for some three and a half years , i know that the parliamentary work on freedom of religion or belief stands out as a beacon across the world . it was with great delight that i heard one of my parliamentary colleagues from the opposition benches say , “ in this work , there is n’t a piece of paper between us here in this house in what we believe in . ” however , the increase in awareness here for this work sadly reflects the reality that , across the world , the rights of religious minorities are under severe attack . freedom of religion or belief has never been more important a cause to champion , for the simple reason that there have never been more people at risk — not just millions but hundreds of millions discriminated against and denied life ’s chances , simply on account of what they believe . some may point out that having a special envoy in statute would be unprecedented , but if the objection to any change was simply that it was unprecedented , we would never make any progress . indeed , that is why we are here in this place — to make legislative change . what is unprecedented is that people have never been more heinously and despicably denied their wish to live out their beliefs . they have never experienced , in the numbers they do today , more abuse , emotional or material hardship , incarceration , or even death , simply on account of what they believe . i hope to give some examples of that a little later in my speech . in the time that i have been the uk ’s prime minister ’s special envoy — from late 2020 — we have seen such an increase in instances of concern . there has not just been an increase in the number of authoritarian regimes ; we have also seen new challenges to freedom of religion or belief through ever increasingly sophisticated technology used to oppress people , and the darkly sinister expansion of transnational repression . let me mention a few examples from countries around the world . we have seen , for example , the military coup in myanmar exacerbating the persecution of religious minorities , not least the rohingya muslims . we have seen the taliban takeover of afghanistan , with every religious group there , other than those willing to succumb to the taliban ’s ways , now oppressed and living in fear . in russia , jehovah ’s witnesses , including the elderly , are now being imprisoned as criminals simply for being pacifists and being unwilling to serve in the army , and putin is weaponising orthodox christianity in the war against ukraine , with places of worship deliberately destroyed and reports of pastors disappearing . we have seen daily disturbances in iran , for which some have paid with their lives . at the core of those is the cry for every iranian to be free to live in accordance with their individual beliefs . in nigeria , thousands of christians and some moderate muslims are being massacred by islamic extremists every year . just on tuesday this week , we commemorated the 21st birthday of leah sharibu , who was abducted by boko haram seven years ago and not released — as were other chibok schoolgirls — because she refused to renounce her christian faith . in nicaragua , the catholic church is being particularly targeted . many people have been expelled , including those running religious schools or medical centres . even mother teresa ’s nuns , who have been working there for over 30 years , were required with no notice at all to leave the country . we are all aware of the situation in china , where over 1 million uyghurs and , reportedly , increasingly more are egregiously incarcerated in 20th - century concentration camps . many have disappeared forever , and many are reported as having died . the allegations of forced organ harvesting against falun gong practitioners would simply defy belief had those allegations not been persistently made by so many . in tibet , according to recent un reports , up to 1 million children as young as two are being sent away to boarding schools , alienated from their families , cultures and beliefs . the world should not stand silent about such things . before my hon . friend moves on , i would like to thank her specifically for her work as envoy . as she has just shown , she has used her voice endlessly to shine a light on some of the darkest corners of the world . i know that she will want me to mention sudan , where we have seen systemic ethnic cleansing of non - arabs , perhaps more on the grounds of race than religion , and that she will also want me to mention the fact that religious leaders can be a force for good in trying to stop violence . in particular , in south sudan , we saw the pope , the archbishop of canterbury and the moderator of the church of scotland work together to call for an end to violence . i would like to say a massive thank you to my hon . friend for her work as envoy , which shows why this role is so important . i thank my right hon . friend for her intervention , and even more so for her work as chair of the all - party parliamentary group on sudan and south sudan , as well as for her acknowledgment of the importance of freedom of religion or belief when she was a minister in the foreign office . she is absolutely right : the influence that religious leaders can have in bringing communities together and preventing the kinds of atrocities i have referred to can not be overstated . this year , it has been my privilege to have collaborated with the archbishop of canterbury to highlight and focus on this issue , including at an event at the foreign office attended by over 100 of those engaged on the issue here in the uk and internationally , among them several parliamentarians — i remember that my right hon . friend the role i have gives the uk an additional privilege : that of holding out the importance of freedom of religion or belief across the world . however , the men , women and children around the world who suffer — whether under the hard arm of authoritarian regimes or at the ruthless whim of militant mobs — need not just our voices , but our partnership . they need not just our words , but our actions ; not just our intentions , but our effective help . that is why the role of envoy , the office that i have the privilege of holding at present , needs securing and resourcing over the long term , beyond the term of any particular government or party in power . of course , this bill intends to do just that . as i say , the bill fulfils the government ’s manifesto commitment to act on their words and fully implement the truro review , which included a recommendation to make the special envoy role permanent , with the requisite authority and resources . there is only one other country in the world with a similar office . the us has had a permanent office promoting and protecting freedom of religion or belief for over 25 years . the stability of that office over time has ensured a build - up of resources , expertise and research capabilities that enable it to make a significant contribution towards combating forb abuses across the world . the uk may be smaller , but if we had such an office , and secured and resourced it as a continuation of the office that i have the privilege of holding at present , it would enable us to speak across the world with a powerful voice for good . we have seen the good influence that the current foreign secretary is having as he speaks out across the world . having represented three prime ministers now , i have been so encouraged by the respect in which the uk is held as we speak out internationally . we sometimes underplay that here , to our detriment . it was noted in committee that although , of course , the prime minister will personally appoint their special envoy , the legislative description in the bill is of a “ minister of the crown . ” the title of “ prime minister ’s special envoy ” provides the vital authority internationally to advocate of behalf of the uk , as i have just touched on . clause 1 reflects the current purposes of the envoy and the requirement to report directly to the prime minister . that direct accountability is so important , and i have found it so helpful under each of the prime ministers i have served . i thank them all for their active support for my role . clause 1(6 ) provides for the continued office of the special envoy and resources to fulfil the role . i say to my hon . friends , across the house , that we are all on the same side when it comes to advocating for freedom of religion or belief . in fact , i do not know of a single member in this house who opposes the bill . why ? because we recognise that it will provide an opportunity to do good — real good — and to change lives . we recognise that anyone who opposes the bill , or seeks to prevent its passage in any way , is in effect opposing the opportunity to do good . i absolutely support the bill . i am not a religious person — i do not follow any religion — but i support the bill because i believe in freedom , which is so important . does my hon . friend agree that the bill is about not only freedom of religion , but freedom of belief ? at the heart of the bill is freedom for people to feel what they feel , whatever their religion . my hon . friend is absolutely right . the clue is in the title : the prime minister ’s special envoy for freedom of religion or belief . “ belief ” indicates that there are some who do not hold a religious belief but who are equally entitled to our support , advocacy and protection on account of their beliefs , whatever they are . i will give the house some examples of the good that this office , if secured permanently , could continue to do . about 18 months ago , my office — the office of the prime minister ’s special envoy for freedom of religion or belief — initiated our monthly “ religious prisoners of conscience ” scheme . every month we champion , and call for the release of , a prisoner across the world who is incarcerated — sometimes in inhumane conditions — simply on account of their beliefs . we have championed a jehovah ’s witness in tajikistan , buddhists in tibet , montagnards in vietnam , a sufi muslim in nigeria , christians and human rights leaders in myanmar and nicaragua , a pastor in cuba , baha’is in iran and others . this monthly programme was quickly taken up by the international religious freedom or belief alliance , now made up of 43 countries , which the uk chaired for two years , 2022 to 2023 . that means it is not just the uk calling for the release of these prisoners , but the collective voice of countries around the world . that advocacy , along with the advocacy of others internationally , has resulted in the release of four of those prisoners , all of whom were facing several years . they include an elderly prisoner who was extremely ill and needed medical attention , and who i believe would have died had he not been released ; he has now had that treatment and is getting better . two other prisoners were young girls in their 20s who faced several years in prison simply for having changed their faith ; they are now free and starting new lives safe in another country . just this week , we heard good news about another of the prisoners of conscience we have championed — this will interest my hon . friend apart from challenging autocratic regimes , as we do , working in this sphere and standing up for those whose basic human rights have been trampled over simply because of their beliefs can make all the difference in the world to people like those i have just mentioned . this has enabled the uk to show global leadership . i am proud to say that the special envoy team for freedom of religion or belief recently won an international award for government leadership on forb . as the bill hopefully passes its final stage here in the commons today , i look forward to it going forward to the lords . again , i thank everyone who has been involved in its passage to date . i rise to speak briefly in support of the bill introduced by my hon . friend i want to very briefly talk about the way i have seen my hon . friend the member for congleton carry out her role in my capacity as chair of the british group of the inter - parliamentary union . my hon . friend regularly attends events that we hold here , where we host parliamentarians from around the world . she has the ability to connect with those parliamentarians to offer them the support they need . very often , those politicians might be subject to persecution in their own country because of their religion , despite being elected politicians . my hon . friend really does provide great support and offers them hope that the work they are doing can have a positive outcome . my hon . friend was also able to demonstrate the uk ’s lead in this area at the first inter - parliamentary union parliamentary conference on interfaith dialogue , which was held last year ; it is so far the only such conference , but i hope there will be more . my hon . friend was one of the star speakers at that event . she was able to come in and talk about the work we do here in the uk . this was an event that brought together faith leaders and politicians from around the world . there were some authoritarian regimes represented , to try to open up that dialogue and show that freedom of religion and belief is a very valuable matter , and that we as politicians need to communicate more with faith leaders than we probably do . when i was minister for modern slavery , it was the faith groups that were able to offer the most support to victims of modern slavery . mr deputy speaker , you are one of the most amiable and approachable chaps i know , but i suspect that many of your constituents find it easier to speak to their local priest , rabbi or other religious leader than to you , because of the trust that people have in the religious and faith leaders they interact with . therefore , it is incredibly important for you to have a dialogue with your faith leaders , as it is for all of us here , because it is how we find out about what is going on for our constituents and how we can get support to them . we can not overstate the importance of faith and its interaction with politics , and how we must all be part of it . i thank my right hon . friend for highlighting the importance of interfaith dialogue . i must not miss the opportunity to promote one of the projects being undertaken by the international alliance of 43 countries . we have a working group on interfaith dialogue , which was launched this year , and we are calling for contributions of good examples of such dialogue from around the world . i encourage anyone in this place , and anyone listening to the debate or reading about it afterwards , to contact our alliance — they can do so through me — in order to contribute . i am so grateful to my hon . friend for raising that . i know that we will all take note of it and look to promote it to our constituents . i will conclude by saying the uk already has a leading role in this area , but putting the envoy on a statutory footing will reinforce that role , ensure continuity and emphasise the intent of parliament to ensure that freedom of religion and belief is always observed . i rise to support this important bill . i will be the first to say that parliament often rushes too quickly to create offices and commissioners for this , that and the other , when a lot of this work should be done by ministers , who should be held to account by parliament for their activities . but i am also very conscious that something that may seem quite narrow in its scope may be lower down in the day - to - day life of a minister . the challenge that people of faith face around the world is so acute that creating this special role permanently , as parliament wishes , is a really important step in ensuring that one of people ’s most fundamental freedoms — freedom of religion or belief — is protected . it is something that the united kingdom cherishes so much that the prime minister will have somebody performing that role in their name , working with them and the foreign office to ensure , through interventions and by convening things like the international alliance , that it is not just an afterthought . it is something that parliament has decided really matters to the outcomes that the post seeks to achieve . i had the good fortune this week to visit the vatican with three other members of parliament on the all - party parliamentary group on the holy see . we met a variety of groups as well as being part of the general audience and meeting his holiness pope francis . i was struck by the conversations that we had with sisters who are part of the international union of superiors general . those nuns undertake really valuable , often dangerous work right around the world , not only in the traditional forms of education or helping with care , in hospitals or palliative care settings , but increasingly in trying to tackle things such as modern slavery . i declare an interest as a trustee of the organisation arise , which does exactly that : we train sisters around the world to identify potential victims of forced labour and exploitation . we give them training on how to make sure that workers — for example , on tea plantations in india — are properly regularised , know their rights and have the right documentation . it is the sisters who do that work , and they are utterly wonderful . my right hon . friend gives me a great opportunity to pay tribute to them , and i thank her for that . i thank my right hon . friend for that intervention . i know how much this issue mattered to her when she was in the home office . traditionally , the sisters will stay in places of conflict and real difficulty despite the threats that they receive . in the past , a religious such as a nun or a priest would have been given some sort of protection , but unfortunately that is no longer the case , and in fact such people are starting to become targets . i am led to believe that 12 % of the world ’s nuns are in india . india is an amazing country , but many of us will have been horrified by the regular and active persecution of christians in parts of that country . of course the uk government need their important relationships with our commonwealth friend , which recently hosted a very successful g20 summit and is a very important part of the global economy , but they also need to challenge aspects of the way in which it deals with freedom of religion and belief . i believe that our ministers do that successfully , but it is of additional benefit to have a special envoy of the prime minister ’s who works with many countries , through the international alliance , on raising these issues . my hon . friend my right hon . friend is making an excellent speech . may i augment what she has just said about the international alliance ? just this week , three members of its council of experts produced a report on the continuing atrocities in manipur , which have been going on for a year . i am pleased that the foreign secretary has spoken in such positive terms about our experts ’ first report , which was produced a year ago , and i hope that members , and those who are listening to the debate , will look at the further report led by the well - known and prestigious former bbc reporter david campanale . those atrocities in manipur require much more attention . my hon . friend is right to make that point , and a permanent role will continue to bring that focus . as the bill makes clear , staff and accommodation will be provided when they are considered to be necessary , which i think is important . this role has been occupied by lord ahmad of wimbledon and by my hon . friend we need people who can focus solely on these matters . the bill does not require them to be politicians . for what it is worth , i think that a sensible balance can be struck , but that will be for the prime minister to decide in the future . nor is the bill trying to create a platform for someone who is disgruntled . i believe that a prime minister , regardless of which political party runs this country , will have the wisdom to appoint someone who is seeking headlines not for their own purposes , but on behalf of those who have been deprived of the freedom to practise a religion or hold a belief . i am conscious that the front benchers are yet to speak and that progress needs to be made on various pieces of legislation today , and i know that my hon . friend i congratulate my hon . friend the prime minister ’s special envoy for freedom of religion or belief plays a role that is so important to many people internationally , as we have heard , and the post firmly places the uk in a leadership role in this area . i was privileged to see what happened in my constituency of east kilbride , strathaven and lesmahagow when my hon . friend visited st bride ’s parish church in east kilbride , on the scottish leg of her united kingdom tour . so many members of my local community , from different faiths , came to hear her speak about the importance of the role , and about how she was reaching out internationally and making a difference for the most vulnerable people in the world . all of those who attended were united in seeing the value of the role and her work , and how vital it is that it should continue . it is testament to my hon . friend ’s selflessness that she does not wish at all to champion the work that she is doing ; rather , she wants to champion the plight of the most vulnerable , and wishes from the bottom of her heart to make sure that this work continues for decades and parliaments to come , under the auspices of this important role . i have seen that at first hand , and i know that my constituency is reflective of those across the uk . my constituents who value the role — so many came to the meeting ; the church was packed — are no different from those across the uk . they too very much value the role and the uk ’s leadership , and see the good work that is being done and its tangible outcomes , which help the most persecuted across the world . i thank my hon . friend once again for that work , for her selflessness and for making sure that it continues for posterity . i congratulate freedom of religion or belief is a core tenet of fundamental human rights , and human rights will always be at the heart of labour ’s outlook on the world and the centre of the shaping of our foreign policy . my right hon . friend in her assiduous campaigning , the hon . member for congleton , and indeed members across the house , have raised issues with the treatment of religious minorities across the globe . as i look around the chamber , i am rather surprised not to see in many countries , including the uk , religious freedom is taken for granted , and people can worship or choose not to worship , whatever their belief , but that is sadly not the case in vast swathes of the world . there has been a growing trend in recent years for religious minorities to be persecuted simply for the beliefs that they cherish so dearly . we sadly see an increase in all sorts of persecution , including of those in the lgbtq community . hon . members often point out examples of religious persecution during debates in the chamber . the hon . member for congleton mentioned the chinese treatment of the uyghur muslim , and we heard in a speech about the treatment of the rohingya minority in myanmar . i know that those two causes mean so much to the hon . member . it is clear to all of us that the persecution of religious minorities happens in many parts of the world , and it is in that spirit that the hon . member has brought the bill forward for its remaining stages today . the opposition will not stand in the way of the bill moving forward , but i repeat — i said this last time — that we should bear in mind that there has been backsliding on the situation for women and girls in many parts of the world , and particularly their reproductive rights . that is often tied into religious expression . i am keen to put that on record as a concern that needs to be borne in mind when the post is established . while freedom of religion or belief does not necessarily conflict with either lgbtq+ issues or the rights of women and girls to reproductive health , it would be wrong to give the impression of putting rights in a hierarchy . i am pleased that in the bill committee , the technical issues around how the statutory basis would work and the flexibility and responsiveness of the government to appoint the special envoy were addressed and ironed out , cross party . in recent weeks , a representative for humanitarian affairs was appointed in the occupied palestinian territories ; that demonstrates how important these roles are . i am sure that the house will continue debating and scrutinising freedom of religion or belief on many occasions . i welcome comments from the hon . member and the minister on any of the issues as we conclude the debate . we will not divide the house on the bill . i am really grateful to my hon . friend the shadow minister , as my hon . friend the member for congleton set out , the bill will make the role of the special envoy for freedom of religion or belief statutory . establishing the role permanently and in perpetuity was a recommendation in the bishop of truro ’s 2019 independent review of the work of the then foreign and commonwealth office on freedom of religion or belief , and the implementation of that recommendation was a manifesto commitment for the conservatives in 2019 . this bill will ensure that the special envoy has clearly defined duties , that they will report to the prime minister on their work and that a minister of the crown must provide resources for the special envoy to carry out their functions . it reinforces the government ’s long - standing commitment to forb for all , which will support us in continuing to embed freedom of religion or belief within the foreign , commonwealth and development office . perhaps most significantly , it will ensure that the positive work being undertaken by today ’s special envoy in this human rights priority area will be continued by future role holders . i pay tribute to my hon . friend the member for congleton , the current special envoy , for all the work she does to promote and protect forb globally . she recently concluded her second term as chair of the international religious freedom or belief alliance . this was the first time in the organisation ’s history that a chair was requested to serve a second term , which is testament to her dedication to the role . as chair of the international religious freedom or belief alliance , our special envoy established a scheme to raise awareness of a different prisoner of conscience every month . the scheme has championed the cases of individuals belonging to a range of religious and belief communities , and in three cases individuals were subsequently released . i hesitate to correct the minister but , just for the record , an additional prisoner of conscience was released very recently , which is why i referred to four , not three . my hon . friend continues to demonstrate both why her role is important and why her indomitable presence in the role is of such value to all those who need to be championed . may i put on record my thanks to my hon . friend i thank my hon . friend . another achievement of my hon . friend the member for congleton , with my noble friend the minister for human rights , lord ahmad , was hosting the fourth international ministerial conference in 2022 . this event brought together government delegations , faith and belief group leaders , human rights actors and civil society from over 100 countries to address the challenges to the right to freedom of religion or belief . this is just a small example of the work so diligently undertaken by our special envoy . last month , in the other place , i was pleased to hear the foreign secretary restate his support for this bill and acknowledge the excellent work being done on freedom of religion or belief . on a more sobering note , the scale of abuses and violations of the right to forb across the world remain deeply concerning , which data , including from the pew forum and the open doors world watchlist , continue to reinforce . and history has shown us that , too often , where freedom of religion or belief is under threat , other human rights are at risk too . we are firm in our position that no one should be persecuted , abused or intimidated because of their religion or belief , or lack thereof . protecting and promoting the right to forb has been a long - standing commitment of this government , and the fcdo is working on this in a number of ways , including through our multilateral and bilateral work , to embed forb across our programmes . i now turn to the amendments tabled by my hon . friend the member for congleton and agreed in committee on the duties of the special envoy have been clarified , setting the same high expectations of delivery for future incumbents as have been achieved by my hon . friend . the bill ’s title was also amended to special envoy for freedom of religion or belief bill so that it refers specifically to the special envoy . this adjustment more accurately reflects the bill ’s scope and content . the amended bill furthermore removes the requirement to establish a separate office of the special envoy , ensuring that existing resourcing arrangements are maintained . to conclude , his majesty ’s government are committed to protecting and promoting freedom of religion or belief for all . the bill cements our commitment to the role of special envoy for freedom of religion or belief , and delivers on our manifesto commitment to implement the recommendations of the bishop of truro ’s review . i therefore commend the bill to the house . i thank my right hon . friends the members for suffolk coastal ( dr coffey ) and for staffordshire moorlands ( dame karen bradley ) , and my hon . friend finally , i would like to thank all the members of the public bill committee for their wonderful support , and the clerk , anne - marie griffiths , for her unflappable counsel and patience . thanks , too , to the comptroller of his majesty ’s household , my hon . friend this short bill embeds our collective commitment and solidarity with individuals across the world who courageously stand for their faith or belief , and do so suffering discrimination , harassment , persecution or worse . another person who i know would have been here , and who it is right to remember , is sir david amess . he was a huge supporter of the mover of this bill . question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . consideration of bill , not amended in the public bill committee i beg to move amendment 1 , page 1 , line 10 , leave out “ clarify the penalty that applies ” and insert — “ increase the penalty that may be imposed ” . this amendment is consequential on amendment 2 . with this it will be convenient to discuss amendment 2 , schedule , page 5 , line 29 , leave out — “ not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale ” . this amendment increases the fine that can be imposed on a person convicted of the livestock worrying offence . it allows for an unlimited fine to be imposed . it is a pleasure to speak to my own bill . it has its origins in the topics to be considered on the animal welfare ( kept animals ) bill , but for a variety of reasons , which i expect we may go into again on third reading , this is now a single - issue bill . i also rise to speak to the amendments . in committee , there was considerable discussion on what penalties would be deemed appropriate . one concern i had — i tabled my own amendment — was simply to ensure that we were not in a situation where the penalties could in any way be less than what had been intended in the dogs ( protection of livestock ) act 1953 . there was no question of that in many ways because the penalty in the original 1953 act was so small , but it did allow a situation to emerge where there was an increase in penalties or fines against owners of dogs if there had been repeat offences . that is what i sought to discuss with hon . members , the minister and officials , to ensure that that was not the case . i was delighted that the government agreed with that principle and that officials were able to come forward with a different amendment , which i am delighted to be moving today . amendment 2 is the substantive amendment — amendment 1 is consequential to it — and if the house agrees to it , the person who commits an offence under the section is liable , on summary conviction , to a fine . there is no limit on that fine ; it is an unlimited penalty . this has become a trend in legislation in recent times . that matters because parliament is not putting in place a cap on what can be done . the flexibility that we can give to the courts is an important way of tackling unacceptable behaviour , such as effectively neglecting the conduct of a dog so that it attacks other animals . i would still expect the sentencing council to issue guidelines regarding what will be appropriate , but in committee it was deemed important to ensure that we reinstate that element of ensuring there could be an escalation , and not some arbitrary cap where parliament decides once and for all on what the fine could be , depending on the severity of the offence . in committee we heard of multiple situations involving either one ewe or lamb , or indeed several . as a consequence , i think it right to allow our courts discretion to adjust the fines accordingly , in line with what the public would expect . i congratulate my right hon . friend on this bill , which i fully support . will she briefly give a summary of the bill for those members who might not have been following its passage as closely as i have ? i would be happy to do that , but i think mr deputy speaker might say that is out of order while we are discussing specific amendments . i will make sure that i do that on third reading , if my hon . friend is amenable to that . i am also hoping to get leeway from mr deputy speaker to talk about amendments that we did not table . another significant discussion in committee was about disqualification orders , whether we should be able to apply those , and what legislation was available to do that . the minister and i both committed to look into the issue further , which we did , and there is a variety of other legislation , including the animal welfare act 2006 , which relates to this sort of activity . i am grateful to the minister for food , farming and fisheries , my right hon . friend as i indicated in committee , i understood that powers were available to undertake such actions , but not specifically in this bill . i do not know whether that has been shared with the house , but depending on the procedures that are allowed , i would be happy to ask for such information to be placed in the library of the house . in essence , the dangerous dogs act 1991 sets out a non - exhaustive definition of when a dog is to be regarded as dangerously out of control , and if necessary a prosecution could be brought under that act , instead of the bill . further legislation even dates back to the dogs act 1871 , regarding when a magistrates ’ court can make a control or destruction order if it appears to the court that the dog is dangerous and not under control . a disqualification order can also be made if the court has decided to make an order for the destruction of a dog by virtue of legislation . that will , i hope , answer some of the questions that i have received from members of the public regarding why certain powers are not specifically included in the bill . although it can be understandably tricky to navigate our legislation , political parties such as the liberal democrats seem to excel in ignoring legislation and trying to create it and then accuse others of not doing something when something is already a criminal offence . i want to ensure that it is on the record that we are not ignoring the opportunity for people to be refused the opportunity to own dogs in the future , if they are simply being irresponsible in allowing this sort of attack , it is just that it will not be covered specifically in the bill . we have basically allowed unlimited penalties to be applied . i think that is good news for aspects of animal welfare , and it will , i hope , be a significant deterrent to people , and encourage them to be more careful with their dogs — we will get into that on third reading and discuss why we are doing this at all . the bill will add strength so that we see a massive reduction in livestock worrying . i congratulate we have heard growing concerns in the farming community about dog attacks . farmers regularly tell me about their personal experiences of dogs chasing or attacking their livestock . a horrific incident was reported to me where someone deliberately set several aggressive xl bully dogs on a flock of sheep , deliberately training them to become more aggressive . the farmer called the police , but they did not consider it a serious enough crime even to turn up — far too often the story with rural crime . there are too many cases like that . the national farmers union found that uk farm animals worth an estimated £ 2.4 million were severely injured or killed by dogs in 2023 alone — a staggering cost at a time when farmers face a devastating storm of rising energy bills , high personal taxation and the damaging effects of severe and repeated flooding . i am deeply concerned about the emotional and psychological impact of these incidents on farmers , when their mental health is increasingly at risk . we see that in the tragic fact that farming now has the highest suicide rate of any sector in the uk economy . i am very pleased that the right hon . member and the minister have listened to calls made on second reading and in committee for stronger sanctions against owners of dogs involved in livestock worrying . i welcome the right hon . member ’s amendment in response to requests to allow much more severe penalties , but it is a shame that the bill does not go further on disqualification in facilitating further deterrence . i listened to what she said about disqualification , but as my hon . friend i wonder whether the right hon . member has looked further into the merits of including a requirement for dogs to be kept on leads when in close proximity to livestock . the opposition were not convinced by the minister ’s explanation of why he thought the costs outweighed the benefits of doing that . again , as my hon . friend the member for cambridge argued , it is entirely reasonable to require dogs to be on leads around livestock . at the very least , we should do more to educate dog owners on how to control their pets and stop them escaping and causing havoc while on the loose . we should certainly promote greater awareness of the countryside code . my hon . friend is making an excellent contribution by highlighting the need for dogs to be on leads and the terrible pressures on farmers at this difficult time . further to the point about education and information for owners , sadly there is a small minority of irresponsible dog owners who have caused terrible problems for farmers . there is a much broader group of dog owners who are responsible , and the point about encouraging the use of leads is important . would he like further information to be provided to dog owners and families with dogs , to remind them of the importance of having their dog on a lead when they are near livestock ? my hon . friend makes an important point and perhaps the minister will address it . in many cases , of course , when a pet dog attacks animals , the owner will say , “ they ’ve never done that before — it did n’t happen before , ” but clearly it can . the more education people have about the risks , the more likely they are to take action that would prevent that from happening . in summary , the bill is a big step forward in supporting farmers and protecting their livestock . the opposition are keen to see the measures in the bill introduced as quickly as possible , as they are long overdue and clearly urgently needed . we continue to support this legislation and i wish it well as it continues its journey through the house . it is a pleasure to speak on what i consider to be a very important bill . not only is it important to many countryside lovers , but it has been very much supported by the national farmers union and the national sheep association , and it will play an important role in strengthening our legislation to deter livestock worrying . i must thank my right hon . friend while i have a farming - linked remit within defra , i am also the access minister , and the legislation is important in terms of access to the countryside , as well because it will give added awareness to people who are going out with dogs . we are encouraging people into the countryside for many reasons — the health and wellbeing benefits and all that — but , as the shadow minister mentioned , we need to raise awareness of the countryside code . taking one ’s dog out into the countryside is a wonderful thing , but respect and understanding must be given to the farming community and to all the responsibilities that lie therein for dog owners walking their dogs . this is important legislation and it will help . i will speak briefly to the amendments tabled by my right hon . friend the member for suffolk coastal . she has listened very carefully to the comments in committee , which is why she has tabled these amendments . they seem to make complete sense and i know they have had a great deal of support . she wants to be sure , as do others , that the courts have the appropriate discretion to impose a higher fine where it is warranted . the current maximum fine that might be imposed is a level 3 fine not exceeding £ 1,000 ; increasing the maximum fine to an unlimited amount would serve to provide an additional deterrent and help to reduce the likelihood of livestock worrying . my hon . friend for the minister for water and rural growth committed to supporting this amendment in committee , and i reconfirm that support today . just to clarify , as was mentioned in the committee , the maximum fine available will be determined by this legislation and will not depend on the sentencing guidelines . sentencing guidelines are developed by the independent sentencing council for england and wales , in fulfilment of its statutory duty . as an independent body , the council decides its own priorities and work plan for reviewing guidelines to reflect any legislative changes . a comment was made about dogs on leads , which i know was discussed in committee . the 1953 act does not make it mandatory for a dog to be kept on a lead around livestock , although a person does commit an offence under the act if the dog attacks or worries livestock on agricultural land . i am pleased to say that the offence includes roads and paths nearby . however , there are often signs stipulating when to put a dog on a lead or where it would be helpful to do so , for example , if there is livestock in the field or in particular where there are cows with calves . i personally would not go into a field where there were cows with calves , because a cow with a calf attacked me when i was a child , but that is a decision for people to make . if a dog owner keeps their dog on a lead , that can sometimes attract cattle to the dog , so the committee ’s view , which i support , was that , in certain specific circumstances , there is a risk to the owner of keeping the dog on a lead . i think my right hon . friend agrees with that ; perhaps she will add some comments shortly . for those reasons , the bill is not proposing to go down that road . on that note , i urge all hon . members to support the bill . with the leave of the house , i wish to respond to the comments made by the shadow secretary of state , i hope that the hon . gentleman is satisfied that the police already have the necessary powers . we will come to the substantial changes in the bill shortly , but these amendments are about ensuring sufficient financial penalties . provisions to have a dog destroyed or to disqualify people from owning a dog are already covered . on his point about keeping dogs on leads , there is a variety of situations in which people will have a dog with them . in addition , people can put a dog on a lead but still not be in control of it . ultimately , that is what this is about . amendment 1 agreed to . amendment made : 2 , in the schedule , page 5 , line 29 , leave out “ not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale ” . — ( dr coffey . ) third reading . i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . it is pleasure to be able to give a short summary of the bill . the 1953 act already provides legislation on the subject , but the bill seeks to make it more straightforward for the police to do their job . in particular , it will allow them to seize dogs to take samples , dental impressions and the like . at the moment , being able to do that relies on the good will of dog owners . the bill extends the scope of the provisions , so they do not only apply to a field that a farmer may own where livestock are kept . it recognises that agricultural practices mean that animals are often transferred from one field to another . for example , current legislation does not apply when animals are crossing a road and a dog is out of control , so the bill extends the scope to cover such situations . it is important to ensure we have the power of entry . an application to a justice of the peace is still required to get that . the bill is all about trying to ensure the police have appropriate powers and to make it more straightforward to prosecute the owners of dogs that are not behaving responsibly . right hon . members and hon . members have rightly talked about what the bill is really about . it is not about penalising people who want to enjoy the countryside on casual walks , which i fully encourage . it is important for people to have access and awareness of nature and to enjoy the countryside responsibly , but they need to recognise that a living , thriving and working countryside provides many farmers with their livelihoods , which is why livestock need protection . a few years ago , i was delighted to welcome my right hon . friend to the smithills estate to plant the first tree in the 15 million tree - strong northern forest . one of the key parts of the visit was when children from st peter ’s smithills dean primary school helped to plant those trees . will my right hon . friend comment on the importance of education ? we want more people from all backgrounds to enjoy the countryside and to know about how to keep livestock safe . i agree very much with my hon . friend , who is right to recognise that . there have been particular concerns since covid that the training of dogs can often be challenging . the nfu and others have led me to believe that dogs left at home can often break out . the owner will not even know anything about an attack or livestock worrying , but the consequences can be significant . it is not simply that a dog will bite or kill a ewe or a calf ; it is important to recognise that even just dogs running around can cause ewes and pigs to have abortions and so on . my right hon . friend is making an excellent speech , and i thank her for bringing forward this bill . she is a true champion of the farming community in suffolk and across the country , and she talks about the nfu . she will know that it is not just about the individual cases but about the scale of this problem , which i am happy to say does not exist in southend . the nfu mutual data shows that the value of claims for dog attacks on farm animals rose to more than £ 1.8 million in 2022 . i did not know before preparing for today ’s debate that , as she points out , it is not necessarily about when a dog comes into contact with a sheep . just having dogs chasing sheep can cause a pregnant ewe to die or miscarry — order . i remind the hon . lady that interventions are interventions , not speeches . if she wishes to speak on third reading , she will have the opportunity to do so . i hear what you say , mr deputy speaker . i think my hon . friend was getting so passionate about this issue that her intervention may have gone on a little too long , but she is right to point out the financial cost and to say that it is about not simply the attack but potential injury and stress , which can have consequences . she is right to highlight that . i recently held a roundtable about this issue in my constituency , and i spoke to farm managers and shepherdesses about the situation . members may know that , without any consequences , a farmer or landowner may shoot a dog that is causing worrying , although often farmers do not want to go around shooting other people ’s dogs . indeed , beyond the impact that it would have on them , not all farmers are licensed to do that , which is the situation in which some of the people at my meeting find themselves . they simply want people to have better control of their dogs , which does not necessarily mean that dogs should be on leads . as i have already mentioned in responding to the amendments , dogs can be on leads that are not even attached to the owner . it is control and recall that really matter , but leads are important for people who are unfamiliar with walking in the countryside or who can not control their dog , for whatever reason . leads are vital in that regard , and they are a way for us to make sure that people have responsible access to the countryside . this is the fourth bill before us today , and i am conscious that those on both front benches would like to see further progress on other legislation before the house . i want to thank tim pratt , tilly abbott , will pratt , ed hawkins and heidi crick , as well as ella thackray and jen cox from the nfu , who came to speak to me about this issue . i have had multiple representations from right around the country . this bill extends to both england and wales , in line with the original 1953 act , but other legislation is already in place in northern ireland and scotland , where different legal systems have evolved over the years . i believe that this bill is a straightforward way to make sure that we help our farmers , whose primary role is to grow food to put on our plates and should not be about worrying — literally — about other people ’s animals worrying their livestock . the measures in this bill were originally included in the animal welfare ( kept animals ) bill . i am pleased to say that we are starting to see other elements of that proposed legislation going through . just this week , the ban on live exports received royal assent , and there have been regulations on other aspects of that issue . it was explained at the time why the bill was split up , but i am pleased to have played a part and to have fulfilled my commitment to get this legislation through the house . i am very grateful to our clerk , anne - marie griffiths , who has given excellent guidance along the way . i really want to thank the officials from the department for environment , food and rural affairs , as well as the ministers and the shadow ministers . i also thank my team , as well as my hon . friend i will begin by talking about two principles : first , we want people to be able to enjoy the countryside . we are lucky to have it . it can help us keep well , both physically and mentally ; it supports wildlife ; it is beautiful , of course ; and it is world - renowned . i have always been someone who enjoys the countryside — a countryside walk is a fantastic way of clearing one ’s mind — but so much of it is accessible and available for us to enjoy only because farmers maintain it . i have previous and current family members who own farmland and keep livestock , and we all benefit from the work and effort that goes into that . that brings me to the second principle , which is that enjoyment of the countryside has to be respectful . that is why i welcome the bill that has been introduced by my right hon . friend one of the features that so many people enjoy about our countryside is seeing farm animals , such as sheep and cows , grazing peacefully as they pass by , but of course we are a nation of dog lovers , so many people are not enjoying the countryside alone . sadly , not everyone who takes their dog with them manages to do so responsibly , which can have terrible consequences . as has been mentioned , nfu mutual data shows that claims from dog attacks on farm animals rose to more than £ 1.8 million in 2022 , and behind those financial claims are distressing stories of killed , injured or frightened livestock and farmers seeing animals for which they care deeply suffering unnecessarily . there is existing legislation aimed at tackling this issue — the dogs ( protection of livestock ) act 1953 , which we are amending today — but as the figures i have mentioned demonstrate , more needs to be done . the nfu and others have long called for reform of the legislation , and it is welcome that we now have the opportunity to do that . let me now talk about some of the things in the bill that are particularly welcome . first , it widens the scope of the 1953 act to include , for example , roads and paths . the movement of livestock along our country roads is another particularly welcome feature of our countryside — many people have a funny story about being stuck behind a moving herd of cattle . that is something that we enjoy about our countryside , and it would not be the same without it , so the law should protect livestock in those circumstances as well . secondly , the bill allows the police to seize a dog that they believe has been involved in an incident when the owner is not present . that is the kind of common - sense reform that is long overdue . thirdly , the bill allows samples and evidence to be collected from dogs and livestock . although policing in urban areas increasingly makes use of cctv , that sort of evidence is not often available in the countryside , so police need to make use of other evidence to prosecute people successfully . i am also pleased that , when enacted , the bill will enable any existing cases to make use of the new powers we are introducing — that is an additional positive feature . i know from my time as a volunteer policeman that so often a small minority of people are responsible for most crime , and i am sure that it is no different in this case . most people enjoy the countryside responsibly , and most farmers understand that it is important that they get to do so , but we have to protect our countryside , and the farm animals that live in it are a fundamental part of it . as an mp who represents rural areas and farmers , i particularly congratulate my right hon . friend on introducing this bill . i have really welcomed the opportunity to speak , even briefly , in support of it in the house today . i rise to support the bill , and to congratulate my right hon . friend dog ownership has increased since lockdown . although most dog owners are responsible and most dogs good - natured , research suggests that dogs are now more likely than before to be left off leads or out of sight . the natural behaviour of all dogs is to chase . many people are unaware that if their dog chases a sheep , it may cause that sheep distress . they may not be aware that even if the dog does not catch the sheep , the simple fact of being chased can cause a pregnant ewe to miscarry her lamb or to die . not only does that have an emotional effect on sheep by causing them to suffer , but it causes an emotional and financial stress for the farmer , as we have heard , so i welcome these steps to strengthen the law . as others have mentioned , education on the countryside code is important , and it should extend beyond the bill to include littering and the closing of gates to keep livestock safe . i welcome the steps to detect where crimes has occurred , as well as the unlimited nature of the fine , which will help to deter people from committing the crime in the first place and encourage them to look after their dogs . i hope that the publicity that my right hon . friend has generated for the bill will serve to provide educational opportunities . i call the opposition front bencher . i do not think that i need to add to the comments that i made on report . we think this is an important piece of legislation and we wish it well as it continues its progress through the other house with wholehearted support from both sides . i call the minister . i must start , of course , by congratulating my right hon . friend we have heard really useful inputs from members , who have used knowledge from their own constituencies . my hon . friend the workplace of farmers was mentioned by our own farmer ’s wife and doctor , my hon . friend to summarise , we know that livestock worrying and attacks on livestock can have terrible impacts . i do not think that a week goes by when i do not open farmers weekly or farmers guardian and see a ghastly picture of such incidents . i am especially proud to be the minister responding today , because i was co - chair of the all - party parliamentary group on animal welfare , which did that first report about livestock worrying in 2017 . i think that a lot of the data has gradually fed into the legislation as we have moved it along . the appg reported then that 34,000 livestock worrying incidents occur every year , so it is a significant problem . not only is it terrifying in terms of animal welfare , but it has a big economic cost : an estimated £ 2.4 million a year is lost through destroyed animals killed by dogs . that is why the bill is so important . it will support our commitment to ensure that new powers are available to the police so that they can respond effectively to the worrying or attacking of livestock by dogs . as my right hon . friend the member for suffolk coastal said — she did so much on this when she was at defra — the government are absolutely committed to the animal welfare agenda outlined in our 2021 action plan . we have a proud record of delivering on that agenda through a raft of measures brought through in a range of ways . we have increased penalties for animal cruelty , extended the ivory act 2018 to include more endangered species , passed the animal welfare ( sentience ) act 2022 , introduced microchipping for cats , banned glue traps , introduced new powers for hare coursing , banned the trade in shark fins and protected service animals via finn ’s law . there is a whole list , and people in this chamber have been involved in many of those pieces of legislation . it is a very proud record . the animal welfare ( livestock exports ) bill has just passed third reading in the house of lords , and we are supporting bills that will deliver a new offence of pet abduction , and cracking down on puppy smuggling . hear , hear . loud cheers from behind me . we are making great progress on delivering so many of those measures that were originally intended in the animal welfare ( kept animals ) bill . i think the record shows , as does today ’s bill , that the government are dedicated and committed to improving animal welfare . indeed , we have the highest welfare score of the g7 , according to the world animal protection index . that is something of which the government should be proud . i know that mr deputy speaker is a great animal lover as well , so this is very pertinent to him . we have given the bill a thorough review today . it will give much added protection to our valuable livestock , and will send important signals to the public regarding access to the countryside with a dog . nothing more remains than to thank everybody involved — all of the officials who have worked so hard on the bill and helped to guide it through both house , and the opposition for their support . more thanks also go to my right hon . friend the member for suffolk coastal . i am delighted to support the bill , and i look forward to seeing it on the statute book . question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . i congratulate the right hon . member for suffolk coastal on taking her bill through the house . bill , not amended in the public bill committee , considered . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . secure 16 to 19 academies , otherwise known as secure schools , are an innovative new form of custody for children and young people that the 2019 manifesto committed to trialling . they will be schools with security , rather than prisons with education . normally when children commit an offence , they are managed in the community with community sentences , but sometimes the offences committed are so awful or the offending is so frequent that a custodial sentence is necessary . thankfully , that is not common ; there are currently around 530 children in the secure estate , and the house may be interested to know that fewer than 12 of them at any time in the last year have been female children . many of these children have significant social , emotional or mental health issues , which are root causes of some of the offending behaviour . even if they have very long sentences , they will come out into the community at a relatively young age , which means that they will have a long time free to contribute to society if they can be effectively given greater rehabilitation opportunities in prison . in sleaford , we have a secure children ’s home that takes younger children into a small environment and gives them a better chance of turning their lives around . the first secure school will be built in medway in kent , providing education to a small number of young people — up to 49 of them — and giving them a good opportunity to bring themselves on to the straight and narrow . the government have already acted , through the police , crime , sentencing and courts act 2022 , to establish the secure 16 to 19 academies in legislation , and this bill makes further necessary amendments to the academies act 2010 to make specific provisions relevant to the establishment of new secure schools , as opposed to other types of academies . the changes proposed cover the termination period in which the government continue to fund the secure school should there be a need to end a funding agreement into which they have entered . in general , normal academies would have a seven - year period , but the bill will reduce that to two for the secure estate . the seven years is calculated on the basis that students would normally spend seven years at a school , but in the case of secure schools , the sentences vary considerably , and the amount of time that a child spends in such an establishment is determined primarily by their legal status . the bill will enable the government to prioritise value for money , which we would expect a conservative government to continue to do . it will also provide more flexibility should there be any need to terminate a funding agreement with a school provider . for such an important part of our vision for the future of the youth custody estate , it is important that we have efficient processes for opening new schools . the bill will modify the consultation requirements in the 2010 act so that they do not apply to secure schools , and help future secure schools to open with minimal delay . for example , anyone who wants to open an academy is required to consider the impact that it will have on pupil numbers in other local schools , but clearly that is not a relevant consideration for a secure school . engagement with local communities is a key part of the ministry of justice selection process for new custodial sites . the bill gives providers the opportunity to engage with their local community , ensuring a more constructive consultation process that will seek to consult on how the secure school works with local partners . it should be noted that a proposal to build an entirely new site would of course go through the regular planning procedures too . by supporting the bill , the house has an opportunity to tailor the legislative framework for secure schools , thereby creating better services and strengthening the impact of secure schools on the lives of children in the justice system . i have been most grateful to hon . members across the house for their support and valued contributions during the bill ’s passage so far . i thank my hon . friends the members for bosworth ( dr evans ) , for copeland ( trudy harrison ) , for scunthorpe ( holly mumby - croft ) , for ruislip , northwood and pinner ( david simmonds ) and for southend west ( anna firth ) , my right hon . and learned friend i hope i have addressed the aims of the bill and the positive impact it can have , and i am proud to move its third reading . i am conscious that this is a small bill , but it is an important one . it recognises the need to make sure that the legislation is up to date and does not limit the opportunities for secure academies to proceed . i have two prisons in my constituency , and during my time as an mp one of them has been a young offenders institution . warren hill is now a category c prison , but when i visited it as a yoi , i saw how important it was to have that educational ethos . i am conscious that young people who are housed in yois have often performed pretty horrific crimes , but i think there is an opportunity with this bill to expand the focus on education while maintaining aspects of the relevant categories . i congratulate my hon . friend i call the opposition spokesperson . may i start by congratulating reforms to youth justice are essential , and we support the measures in the bill . the hon . member is right that secure schools — schools with security rather than prisons with education — are an innovative form of custody for children and young people . the 2016 taylor report laid out why we need to reimagine how we care for children who commit offences serious enough to warrant their detention in custody . the government committed that year to phase out young offender institutions and secure training centres , and to replace them with a network of secure schools , since renamed secure 16 to 19 academies . media reports today reference the first secure school being set to open in medway on the site of the medway secure training centre , which is set to house 49 children aged 12 to 18 who were sentenced or remanded to custody by the courts . however , as the hon . member for sleaford and north hykeham knows , the journey has been beset by delays . the public accounts committee report in 2022 said that the first secure school had not yet opened more than six years after it was recommended , and costs had indeed spiralled — from an estimated original £ 4.9 million , i think , to £ 40 million — because of unexpected additional requirements that had not been factored in . the first secure school was originally set to open by autumn 2020 , as the public accounts committee identified ; the former medway stc site was then to open by november 2023 , but was again delayed to february 2024 , and it is still yet to open . the main point , with which i am sure the hon . lady will agree , is that we need effective planning and risk management to be much better than we have seen to date in the history of the secure schools implementation . i will make a couple of further comments in that regard , but will first make our comments on the proposed changes , which we support . we support the reduction of the minimum notice period ; as has been mentioned , the seven - year termination period was clearly intended for continuity of education provision for those who might be in year 7 who might expect to be able to go on to year 13 in their school . it is also right to say that secure schools are not competing with other schools in their area . on the third amendment , on consultation with appropriate persons on how the school will work with local partners , the hon . lady made an important distinction between where there might be new developments to go through a full planning process and where an existing facility may be adapted or refurbished . on the latter , i hope that the hon . lady will agree that we want people to be confident in these schools and to feel engaged in what is happening in their community . it is important that we have learning and best practice from the implementation of the first secure school as well , and that we keep under review the way in which communities are being engaged . i hope the hon . member for sleaford and north hykeham will also agree — perhaps she will comment on this — that it is important to keep under review the continuity and quality of the education being provided . as she says , the children going into these secure schools may be there for a period of months , or they may be there for longer . bearing in mind there has to be an assessment of their education on entry , what consideration is there for the continuity and quality of that education , as well as the maintenance of relationships with family ? children as young as 12 are being cared for in these secure schools — that is very young . how will visiting arrangements and temporary release arrangements be determined ? it is important that risk assessments are followed so that families and communities continue to have confidence in the reforms as they are rolled out . i will also make a point on behalf of my hon . friend i want to raise two important matters . the first is around capacity and the implications of a lack of capacity on the quality of provision . based on analysis of data from the department for education , article 39 says : “ at any one time , around 25 children each day are waiting for a secure children ’s home place and around 20 are placed by … local authorities in scottish secure units due to the lack of available places . the … number of secure children ’s homes places means that , even when children get a place , ” they are likely to end up living far away from home . given the severe shortage of places in secure homes , and although the first secure 16 - to-19 academy is set to be run by oasis , there is no guarantee that , with the growing pressure to create places as we see the reforms continue , other quality education providers with the necessary expertise across both education and justice , youth justice in particular , will come forward . i hope the hon . member for sleaford and north hykeham will agree that we need to monitor how we build capacity , otherwise the outcome will be to sacrifice the quality of provision for children against the pressure to create places . i would be grateful for her comments on that . the second challenge is about rehabilitation , to which the hon . lady referred , and prevention . at the moment , there is no cohesive plan to stop young people picking up knives , which is why labour has announced a young futures programme that would require new local partnerships to identify the young people most at risk of knife crime and to build a package of support to prevent them from ever offending . this will draw on up to £ 100 million a year , based on combining existing commitments to fund new youth mentors and mental health hubs in every community , youth workers in pupil referral units and a&e , and a programme of public sector reform to deliver a targeted programme in every area . she may have broadly considered this in relation to her amendment on community engagement , but the community engagement of secure academy providers may be important to wider community youth crime prevention . i congratulate the hon . lady on this important bill , which i wish every success as it continues its passage through the house . i thank my hon . friend it is a sad reality that a small number of children commit offences so serious that there is no option other than to deprive them of their liberty in order to protect the public . it is the government ’s responsibility to ensure that they receive the appropriate support to prepare them for their eventual release and to turn their life around . as the house will be aware , charlie taylor published his landmark review of the youth justice system in 2016 . the report made a number of important recommendations , including on the need to reimagine how we care for children who commit serious enough offences to warrant detaining them in custody . his proposal was to create a new type of custodial environment , focused on the delivery of education , to offer children the opportunity to gain the skills and qualifications necessary to prepare them for their release into the community . the police , crime , sentencing and courts act 2022 established secure schools in legislation as secure 16 - to-19 academies , under both the academies act 2010 and the children ’s homes ( england ) regulations 2015 . the first ever secure school , oasis restore , is in the process of ofsted registration and hopes to welcome children in the very near future . the minister of state , ministry of justice , my right hon . friend why do we need secure schools ? the number of children in custody has fallen drastically in recent years , with 82 % fewer children under the age of 18 in custody than in 2010 . it is right that we should deprive children of their liberty only as a last resort , and the decline has rightly been commended as a success of the youth justice system . however , for children who commit the most serious crimes , there remains a need to protect the public by detaining them in custody . the children now in custody are among the most complex and vulnerable in society , and they present with very challenging behaviour . the majority have committed violence - related offences and are much more likely to reoffend upon release than adult prisoners . the latest government statistics show that 62 % of children released from custody go on to reoffend within a year . secure schools are a necessary change to break this cycle of reoffending . the children in custody are also more likely than their peers to have had a disrupted education . government analysis shows that around 90 % of children sentenced to custody had a record of persistent absence . that means that these children have lost out on months or years - worth of learning . the evidence about the importance of education as a preventive factor in childhood offending is clear . secure schools offer these children an opportunity to re - engage with education and make the most of their potential . the secure school model has been developed in accordance with the best available evidence of what works in addressing the underlying causes of youth offending . that is why secure schools offer small and homely environments , with healthcare and education at their heart . in secure schools , children and young people will engage with integrated care services , including health and education , tailored to their individual needs . on entry , each young person will have a full assessment of their needs , to establish a baseline against which progress can be measured and to ensure that any unmet health and special education needs are identified . they will have personalised programmes that build on their strengths and develop their potential , with the use of evidence - based interventions that help them to build resilience and develop vital skills that will help them in the future . curriculum delivery will take place in appropriately sized groups , including through one - to - one interventions where needed . children in secure schools will have the opportunity to make educational progress on a par with that of their peers in mainstream schools , proportionate to the length of their sentence . secure schools will work closely with youth offending teams , with education , health and other community service providers and with young people ’s families where appropriate . planning for resettlement will start when a young person enters a secure school and will be adapted to support transition to the adult estate where appropriate . the government support the bill , because secure schools are a landmark reform in youth custody that , as has been mentioned , will help to reduce reoffending and ultimately lead to fewer victims of youth crime , thereby protecting the public . however , it is only by ensuring that secure schools function well , with proportionate termination measures , and appropriate and efficient processes for opening new schools , that we will achieve that goal . in closing , i would like to thank the opposition for their support for my hon . friend the member for sleaford and north hykeham , and also officials at the ministry of justice for supporting her in preparing the bill . i reiterate my thanks to my hon . friend for bringing it before the house . i also reiterate with great pleasure that the government support this important bill . i wish it well in its progress in the other place . i rise to thank again those who have helped with the passage of the bill . in sleaford , we have a secure children ’s home that runs a small unit providing great education and rehabilitative care to those young people . i welcome the fact that the bill will help to extend that educational and holistic approach to helping young people to turn their lives around . i again congratulate the hon . lady on piloting her bill through the house . question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . bill , not amended in the public bill committee , considered . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . this bill on school attendance is important to our nation ’s children and to their futures . at time when there is so much discord in politics , it has been truly uplifting to know that , when it comes to our children , even members of parliament can agree with each other and do the right thing . i want to start by thanking all colleagues , from all parties , for their unanimous support for the bill at every stage of its proceedings through the house . as a mum , i always wanted my children to have a wide range of choices available to them , so that they could choose the best opportunities for their future . getting five good gcses gives a teenager a lot of choices . with these grades , they can do a - levels , t - levels or an apprenticeship . without them , choices suddenly become much more limited . one of the schools in my constituency analysed the performance of two identical cohorts of students . of the group who had attended 95 % to 100 % of the time , 82 % got five good gcses ; about five in 30 children did not . of the group who had attended between 90 % and 95 % of the time , only 68 % of them got good gcses ; that means that 10 out of 30 did not get good gcses . that shows how even a tiny drop in attendance can have long - lasting consequences for our children . the children ’s commissioner found that three quarters of children who were rarely absent from school received five good grades at gcse including in english and maths , but of those who are persistently absent — missing 10 % or more of their school time — only one in three were meeting that standard . for children who were severely absent , only one in 20 were doing so . that is why we are all so correct in being so concerned about the rise in school absences . before i speak about absences , i want to say that we should be extraordinarily proud of our nation ’s young people . children in england now rank 11th in the world for maths and 13th for reading , whereas back in 2010 , when today ’s school leavers were just starting out in reception , the same league tables placed the equivalent cohort of children 27th for maths and 25th for reading . i am really proud that every single school in my chelmsford constituency is now ranked “ good ” or “ outstanding ” ; 14 years ago under labour , one in three kids in my constituency had to go to schools that were not even “ good ” . let us be proud of our kids , but absence is a really challenging issue . the pandemic significantly disrupted school attendance levels , not just here but across the world . about one in five pupils in england are still missing the equivalent of half a day or more of lessons a week . that means that over a million children are missing significant amounts of their education . that is limiting not only their education but their choices , their chances to make friendships and take part in enrichment activities , as well as so many other issues that are so important for their behaviour . we know that the reasons for absence from school can be multiple and complex . such issues include support for those with special educational needs and disabilities , anxiety or mental health issues . if a child ’s send needs are unmet , that can lead to their missing out on their education . changes in attitudes towards minor ailments may be another driving force behind the rise in absences . i say to parents , who are now much more likely to keep their children at home for minor illnesses such as coughs or colds than before the pandemic , that they should please be aware that in most cases children are better off at school even if they have a minor ailment . for the most vulnerable pupils , regular attendance is also a really important protective factor . that is why i was very concerned to hear from an expert on alternative provision that attendance has dropped below 60 % for the first time in some of the settings he covers . we know that regular absence from school can expose young people to harms such as being drawn into crime or serious violence . some commentators have noted that absence is higher among children on free school meals , but one multi - academy trust leader i spoke to who had done a lot of research at his school suggested that was not the case for all ethnic groups . those schools he looked at with a higher proportion of pupils with english as a second language had a much higher level of attendance than school cohorts with a higher proportion of british white students . that really needs further investigation . another head of a multi - academy trust with schools in my area said there had been an uptick in poor attendance particularly among girls in years 8 to 10 . many other school leaders have confirmed similar trends and suggested that that may be linked to lower mental wellbeing and self - esteem . those of us who attended tuesday ’s westminster hall debate on the impact of social media and screen time — particularly on teenagers and particularly on girls — noted the link between poor mental health among teenage girls and social media , and the further link between poorer mental health and higher anxiety and missing school . it is deeply concerning . there have also been stories in the press recently about the links , in some families , between the increase in hybrid working and children missing school . as a mum , i completely understand how much more difficult it must be to persuade a sometimes reluctant child to go to school if you yourself are working from home on the day in question . all those issues are important , but my bill will make a significant difference . it will mean that every council will have to use its services to help to remove the barriers faced by some children . it will mean that every school in the country will need to publicise a detailed attendance policy and share it with parents , pupils and carers . all schools and local authorities will have to follow best practice guidance on school attendance , which has put a great deal of emphasis on the importance of early help and multidisciplinary support . we know that some children and some parents face specific challenges when it comes to school attendance , such as transport needs or special educational needs , and the guidance covers those in detail . schools will be required to have a named attendance champion , and families will be aware of the expectations incumbent on them before choosing secondary schools . local authorities will need to meet representatives of each school regularly , and together they will need to discuss cases in which multi - agency support is needed . in that event they will need to work with the agencies to provide that support , especially in cases of persistent or severe absence . the bill provides a “ support first ” approach for families to help to ensure that children attend school regularly . this is very simple but crucial legislation . i hope it will help to transform the lives of all children and young people ; i hope it will reduce the unfairness whereby different amounts of support are available to families in different parts of the country by providing for a more consistent approach ; and i hope it will open up a new conversation on the timings of holidays . i entirely understand the pressure on families to take time off for family holidays in term time because it is generally much cheaper , but if a child does miss out on school for that reason , it will have an impact on that child ’s education and life choice , and it will not help the child in the long term . i welcome my right hon . friend ’s bill , and i agree with her that attendance is vital to a child ’s education . she has made an important point about the effect that going on holiday in term time can have on an individual pupil , but does she agree that if pupils are missing , that will have an effect on the rest of the class , and that it is not fair on the teacher or the support staff who may have to work extra hard to ensure that the child who was missing can catch up without the whole class being affected ? as ever , my hon . friend has hit the nail on the head . some children need to take time off school because , for instance , they have appendicitis and are having an operation . teachers understand that , and will work with children in that position to help them to catch up . however , we are now seeing an increasing number of children taking time off school — perhaps because it is a monday or a friday and they are extending a weekend and perhaps because a parent is working from home . it is impossible for the teachers to help so many children to catch up . they just can not , much as they would want to . all those missed afternoons and missed mornings add up to a loss of learning . not only does that hit children ’s abilities to get good gcses , but teachers have explained to me that if it happens in the early years it can become an ongoing behaviour . we might think , “ oh , it really does n’t matter , they ’re not in an exam year , ” but it builds in the habit and it builds in with the class , so it is crucial . in order to try to solve the holiday issue , i would like to see schools use the powers they already have to vary their term times a bit , which might give more families the opportunity to avoid peak season options . perhaps we will see more regional changes : for example , different parts of germany have slightly staggered school holidays so that not all the country is trying to go to the beach at the same time . i have discussed with some of the headteachers in my constituency whether we could have an essex approach . we had a slightly different february half - term in essex : our essex children had their february half - term a week after the rest of the country , which gave families a bit more flexibility . having a regional approach meant that , for families who had primary schools kids at one school and secondary school kids at another , the family school holidays still overlapped . i would like to see more work done by schools with their local authorities to see whether they can give a bit more of that flexibility . coming back to the bill , i say a big thank you to all the right hon . and hon . members who took time to sit on the bill committee and to the education committee for its support . the children ’s commissioner deserves an enormous amount of thanks for the work she has done on this issue , and particularly from me for the roundtable of real experts that she brought together , including children ’s mental health charities , multi - academy trusts , local authority experts and others in this area . the centre for social justice has also looked in depth at the impact that missing school is having on our children . i also thank the schools minister , especially for coming to visit a school in chelmsford to hear directly from staff and students about this issue , and i thank the exceptional team at the department for education , as well as the staff in this house , for their very hard work on the bill . to conclude , we know that , for most children , the best place to be is in school , where they are surrounded by the support of their friends and teachers . we know that children will invariably fall behind if they miss time in the classroom , no matter how much teachers and others try to help them to catch up . we know that going to school is important not just for our children ’s education , but for their wellbeing , wider development and mental health . sadly , we also know that for many children the pandemic brought loneliness , loss of communication , loss of face - to - face time with their friends and loss of laughter — and for some children , those losses have had a lasting impact . the bill will not be a magic wand , and it will not undo all the harms caused by covid , but it is a very firm step in a happier and more positive direction . i congratulate my right hon . friend and fellow essex mp my right hon . friend is absolutely right that education is the best way to change our children ’s future and thereby our country ’s future , giving all our children the opportunity to excel and to develop their true potential . she is right to point out that we have made enormous strides with education , particularly under this government and over the last 14 years , to a point where we now have the best readers in the western world . she pointed out how we have raced up the pisa tables ; we now rank 11th in the world for maths and 13th for reading worldwide . however , i was deeply concerned last year to see reports suggesting that , in southend , a fifth of school pupils are missing 10 % of their lessons over the course of a year . the most recent data from southend learning network suggests that , in primary schools , persistent absence sits at 5.7 % , just above the national average of 5.4 % . in secondary schools , persistent absence is 7 % , which is below the national average of 8.7 % . that is good news , but both those figures are still too high . as my right hon . friend eloquently demonstrated , only a small diminution in attendance can have a significant impact on exam results and , therefore , pupils ’ ability to go on and fulfil their potential . that is why i welcome the action that she has taken . she highlighted how good attendance requires a holistic approach , involving schools , families , local authorities and other local partners , which i wholeheartedly agree with . i also agree with the view of the education committee , of which i am a member , that the department for education ’s 2022 guidance , “ working together to improve school attendance ” should be put on a statutory footing . the bill takes steps to ensure that that happens . this is an excellent bill , and i am delighted that it enjoys cross - party support . it is a positive step forward in enabling children to get the support they need and help them not only to return but to stay in school . again , i thank my right hon . friend for introducing it . it has my full support . i hope to see it pass today and make swift progress through the other place , so that we can get it on the statute book as soon as possible . i call the opposition spokesperson . i congratulate earlier this year , labour tabled an opposition day motion containing a range of possible ways to address the problem , but it is unfortunate that the long - term plan to deal with the school attendance crisis was voted down by conservatives . labour supports the bill but , as the right hon . lady acknowledged , it is a first step and not a magic wand . she is right to lay out the impact of absence on attainment , why we need to be concerned about that and the long - term impact of absence on children ’s opportunity . it is important that our systems all work together to support children to stay in school , which is why we welcome clause 1 , which introduces a duty on local authorities and clarifies their role in promoting regular attendance and reducing absence . clause 2 is also important , as it includes particulars that schools must include in their attendance policies , with guidance on how they should be issued and communicated to parents . the measures are welcome and i hope that they will have a positive impact on the situation in our schools . i pay tribute to the think - tanks and mothers who have been involved in many discussions on how we tackle this issue across the house . the right hon . lady also mentioned some ways in which there could be variations in the school holidays , which could support greater attendance where holidays may be part of the challenge . in my constituency , i have talked to schools about the variation they have had , with two weeks for an extended half - term in autumn and one week less in summer , which they say has had a positive impact on engagement and support for learning . proper interventions are vital to get children back into the classroom . as the right hon . lady mentioned , the figures are stark . last year , under this government , 21.2 % of children were persistently absent from school . that is more than one in five , and double the figure just six years earlier . the number of children missing half their lessons has rocketed , too . in my local authority of hounslow , it has more than doubled in just six years . other areas have even higher numbers . how can we properly set up a child for the future if they are missing every other lesson in school ? the labour party firmly believes that every child matters and that every day at school matters . fixed - penalty notices for school absence must be a part of the system , but they are not the answer alone . there is a view , which the right hon . lady may have , on guidance in relation to penalties where children may be undergoing assessments for education , health and care plans , but it is important that we look at the wider support . that is why we in the labour party have set out a long - term plan that looks in the round at the issues causing absence and persistent absence , including supporting schools with the recruitment , which we have announced and committed to , of 6,500 new teachers . we will roll out free breakfast clubs in every primary school . evidence shows that they improve children ’s learning and development , and they have a positive impact on attendance and behaviour . it is also vital to address the mental health crisis that our children are facing . mental ill health is a key barrier to learning and attendance , yet children are remaining on long child and adolescent mental health services waiting lists , unable to access the support they need . the waiting list for assessment is over two years in many instances . we would recruit thousands of new staff to bring down those waiting lists and put specialist mental health professionals in schools and community hubs , so that children can get the help they need , solving problems before they get worse . i commend my hon . friend for her support for further interventions to support children and young people facing mental health difficulties . it is an issue raised frequently in many mps ’ surgeries , including in mine , so i am very grateful for her support in this important area . i thank my hon . friend for that point . the broader point he is also making is that schools must have that support , because it is a part of how they can tackle absence in schools . that is why we need to tackle this issue head - on and not let it spiral further out of control . children are not engaging with the curriculum and assessment system , which has been described to us — i also speak on behalf of the shadow schools minister , my hon . friend children ’s early speech and language development has also suffered over the past few years , and covid contributed other stresses and anxieties . getting it right at an early stage will lead to better engagement throughout school life . we would equip primary schools with funds to deliver evidence - based early language interventions . finally , we would introduce a “ children not in school ” register to ensure that children who are not being taught in a school environment do not fall through the gaps . today ’s bill is extremely important and i again congratulate the right hon . member for chelmsford . i wish it well as it moves through the other place , but it is important to acknowledge that it shines a spotlight on the government ’s lack of action to deal with the crisis in our schools . significantly , that was highlighted by sir kevan collins when he resigned as education recovery commissioner in 2021 . in describing the government ’s catch - up plan as “ feeble ” , he highlighted how there was not the intervention that we need to secure our children ’s future effectively . that is why we need much more urgent action from ministers on how they intend to tackle this problem . tinkering around the edges simply will not do . we need a proper long - term plan , and if the government will not deliver it , despite the right hon . lady ’s best efforts , the next labour government will do so . it is a pleasure to respond to the debate and outline the government ’s view about the importance of delivering this provision . i thank my right hon . friend all evidence points to school as the best place for children ’s attainment , wellbeing and development . this important bill can play a crucial role in ensuring that all children attend regularly , and i am delighted to lend the government ’s support to it today . it has been clear through the passage of the bill , as my right hon . friend and the schools minister explained , that there has been significant cross - party support and co - operation at every stage . we thank hon . members for that , including those on the opposition front bench ; it speaks volumes about the way that my right hon . friend has managed to steer this important bill through the house . throughout its passage , members have taken time to contribute and share experiences and views about how important this issue is , and we heard strong examples of the work that schools and local authorities are doing to improve attendance . we must ensure that that work continues and expands across the country . the government support the bill , because we want to give parents clarity and to level up standards across all parts of england — across all 24,000 schools and 153 local authorities , and their 9 million pupils . thanks to the incredible work of those schools and councils , we are starting to see signs of improvement . last academic year , 440,000 fewer pupils were persistently absent or not attending than in the previous year , and 375,000 more children were in school almost every day—95 % of possible sessions — compared with the year before . that second figure was based on improvements across the country across all phases , including key vulnerable cohorts such as children with special educational needs or those in receipt of free school meals . prior to the pandemic , we gradually reduced persistent absence from 17.4 % in the school year that ended in 2010 , to about 10 % or 11 % in the second half of the decade , up until the point at which covid struck . we are determined to get back there as quickly as we can , but there is further to go and the bill will play an important part in that . there are still areas of the country where families can not access the support they need , but by placing requirements in primary legislation for local authorities to exercise their functions with a view to promoting attendance , for schools to publicise an attendance policy , and for both to have regard to department for education guidance in doing so , we are taking another key step forward in ensuring consistency . my right hon . friend has been working closely with the schools minister , and he detailed on second reading and in committee the comprehensive strategy that we have in place to support schools and councils to meet their expectations , whether that is through attendance hubs , attendance advisers , or the use of improving and groundbreaking data . i will not go over all that again , but we will continue to ensure that all that support still applies and is available to schools and councils . my right hon . friend raised an important point about holidays and staggering term time , and i completely agree with a number of the points she made . of course , we absolutely sympathise with families who want to avoid more expensive periods , but we are clear that pupils should not miss school for term - time holidays , which cause unnecessary disruption to learning and make it harder for teachers to plan lessons and cover the curriculum . obviously , those school holidays are not determined at national level : they are set by local schools and , depending on the type of school , by local authorities too . in our view , those institutions are best placed to make those decisions , but i know they will take into account some of the points that my right hon . friend raised during her remarks , which i thought were very well made . some points were also raised by the opposition front - bench spokesperson , this is a hugely important bill , and my right hon . friend the member for chelmsford has done a huge service to pupils up and down the country , including those in her constituency , by bringing it forward . being in school has never been more valuable than it is now , with standards continuing to rise through the hard work of teachers . my right hon . friend referred to the rocketing of schools ’ performance : 90 % are now good or outstanding , up from 68 % under the last labour government . we have the fourth best primary school readers in the world , and our secondary school children have risen from 27th to 11th in maths — that is a transformation in standards and achievement — and from 25th to 13th in reading . i am very struck by the comments that the minister is making about the improvement in schools . will he congratulate the schools in staffordshire moorlands , where since 2010 , we have gone from fewer than 70 % of schools being good or outstanding to nearly 90 % now ? my right hon . friend ’s intervention demonstrates the on - the - ground importance of the improvements in standards that we have seen over recent years . i have no doubt that that is down to the tremendous hard work of teachers , the local authority , parents and students , and i know that my right hon . friend has been a strong champion of improving school performance . of course , it is not just in staffordshire ; all around the country we are seeing that drive for standards and rocketing international comparisons . i thank her for raising that point ; she was absolutely right to do so . crucially , this bill will help to make sure that every young person and their family , whatever their background and wherever they are in the country , receives the support they need to be in school , to make sure they are attending , and to benefit from the transformation in educational standards that we have seen over the past few years . i sincerely thank all right hon . and hon . members for their contributions today ; my hon . friend finally , i congratulate my right hon . friend the member for chelmsford on bringing forward this important bill , which the government are delighted to support . i commend it to the house . with the leave of the house , i again thank everybody who has taken part during the passage of this bill . i may have been a little modest . this is a very short bill — it is only a couple of pages long — but the guidance that it will make statutory is enormously detailed and wide - ranging . that is why making that guidance statutory was the no . 1 recommendation of the education select committee , and the no . 1 ask from the children ’s commissioner and many others . i remember the opposition day debate to which the shadow minister , question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . congratulations to the right hon . lady . bill , not amended in the public bill committee , considered . third reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read the third time . clause 1(a ) is the central and crucial provision of the bill , so i shall briefly explain its purpose and why it is necessary . before a company can operate a satellite in orbit or carry out a launch mission from the uk , it must first obtain a spaceflight operator licence under the space industry act 2018 . the licence process ensures that spaceflight activities are undertaken safely , securely and in accordance with the uk ’s international obligations . under united nations space treaties , the state is ultimately liable for any damage or injury that may be caused by its space activities — even those undertaken by commercial space operators . the 2018 act therefore contains provisions to help mitigate potential costs to uk taxpayers arising from uk commercial spaceflight activities . the provisions include the power to incorporate licence conditions requiring operators to hold insurance and , under section 36 of that act , to indemnify the uk government and other named public bodies against any claims brought against the government or body in respect of damage or loss . it is recognised , however , that placing unlimited liability on commercial space activities would be a barrier to operating in the uk . other space nations , such as france and the united states , limit liabilities or provide a state guarantee for the launch activities that take place from their territory . section 12(2 ) of the 2018 act currently provides a power to specify a limit on the amount of the licensee ’s liability to indemnify under section 36 . current government policy is that the regulator should use those powers to specify a limit on operator liability in the licence so that no operator will face unlimited liability . that policy is set out in guidance , and i understand that all spaceflight operator licences issued to date under the 2018 act contain a limit on the amount of liability . however , those in the industry have made clear , in response to consultation and in other fora , that they would welcome the legal certainty that they will not face unlimited liability when launching or operating a satellite from the uk . clause 1(a ) amends section 12(2 ) of the 2018 act by replacing “ may ” with “ must ” . that will change section 12(2 ) from being a discretionary power to a mandatory requirement by specifying a limit on the amount of an operator ’s liability under section 36 in respect of the licence . clause 1(a ) is a key regulatory improvement to the 2018 act . it will provide assurance to investors that limits on the amount of an operator ’s liability to indemnify government and other named bodies will be included in licences . however , the existing provisions in legislation about the circumstances in which the limit on the amount of liability does not apply will continue to have effect . they include circumstances in which an operator is liable in gross negligence or wilful misconduct , or in which damage or loss is caused by non - compliance by the operator with its licence conditions , the requirements of the 2018 act , or regulations . clause 1(b ) contains a minor but necessary consequential amendment to section 36 of the 2018 act . overall , clause 1 meets a key request from the sector . it will also address a recommendation made by the taskforce on innovation , growth and regulatory reform . the amendments made by clause 1 are consistent with government policy , which is designed to support and grow the uk ’s commercial space sector . by setting a clear requirement in law for a limit on operator liability in the licence , the clause will provide uk industry and those looking to invest in the uk with greater certainty , and carry more force than reliance on policy statements and guidance . as we convene for third reading of this vital bill , i urge colleagues across the house to consider the profound impact it will have on safeguarding british industrial and business interests in the burgeoning field of space and spaceflight . the bill seeks to address critical uncertainties surrounding liability and indemnity for our space industry , providing much - needed clarity for current and prospective spaceflight operators and investors alike . i congratulate my hon . friend on his bill . will he confirm that it will give the uk a real competitive advantage in the space industry ? it seems to me that it will . i thank my right hon . friend for that intervention . i can confirm that the bill will set us on par with the united states and france , our friends and probably our main competitors in this important arena . the space industry is already worth £ 17.5 billion a year , and it is estimated that these measures will add tens of billions over the coming decade or more . my right hon . friend makes a really important point ; the bill will make us competitive in an area where , currently , we are not quite there . i congratulate my hon . friend on third reading of his bill , which will make a huge difference to the space industry . does he agree that it is imperative , as we move through the 21st century , that we encourage more women and girls to consider taking up the skills and employment opportunities that the space industry offers ? sadly , to date the industry has been too male focused . if we are going to pass bills like this that give the industry the confidence to expand , hopefully we will be able to encourage more women and girls to consider a career in the space industry . my hon . friend makes an excellent point . the bill will help provide certainty for our space industry for many years to come . of course , we need all the talent that we can provide in this country . i completely agree that we want more girls going into science , technology , engineering and maths , and considering a career in this fantastic , relatively new industry . by amending section 12(2 ) of the space industry act 2018 , the bill will firmly establish in law the imperative that all spaceflight operator licences will have a defined limit on liability . such clarity will not only fulfil a long - standing demand from the sector , but ensure that our regulatory framework aligns with international standards and best practice . in an era when commercial space activities are poised for the huge growth that i have just mentioned , the bill is a decisive step towards fostering a competitive and thriving space industry on our shores . members from cornwall and scotland in particular will know the benefits of that , with our new spaceports . mandating specific liability limits , essentially forming a type of risk sharing between the commercial operator and the government , will empower businesses to navigate risks prudently while encouraging continued investment in space - related ventures . as a nation , we must seize every opportunity to cultivate an environment in which british enterprises can flourish and contribute to the advancement of our economy and our technological prowess . furthermore , we should acknowledge the collaborative efforts that have shaped this legislation , drawing on insights gleaned through consultation with industry stakeholders and from expert recommendations . the bill reflects a balanced approach that prioritises the interests of both business and the public purse , ensuring that our regulatory framework remains robust yet adaptable to evolving circumstances . by enshrining these principles in law , we affirm our commitment to fostering a vibrant yet responsible space industry that serves the interests of our nation , our businesses and our citizens . by passing this bill , we not only bolster confidence in our regulation but lay the groundwork for a future in which british ingenuity propels us to new frontiers of discovery and prosperity . i urge all members to support this bill , recognising its significance in shaping the trajectory of our nation ’s space industry for decades to come . it is a pleasure to speak on this bill , for which i commend as others have said , private companies need a spaceflight operator licence , as set out in the space industry act 2018 , before they can operate from the uk . i am pleased to say that we continue to support the act as a means to ensure safety and compliance , and it is right that the act works to limit the extent to which uk taxpayers are liable for picking up the cost of commercial spaceflight . i recognise that the limits to liability in the licences that the act allows are key to ensuring the potential economic viability of space activities . in that spirit , i welcome the move towards legal certainty regarding liability limits when launching or operating satellites from the uk . as we have heard , the bill seeks to do this by amending the space industry act to legally require liability limits in space operator licences . this will provide welcome clarity and reassurance to investors . we want to see a thriving uk space sector and to help our strong space sector businesses fulfil their potential . as a nation , we have a proud history of space exploration and global collaboration in this important field , going back to 1957 when british skylark rockets were launched from woomera in australia . in 1962 , the uk partnered with nasa to launch rockets from an italian base off the coast of kenya , and , at the turn of the millennium , the british national space centre was the third largest financial contributor to the european space agency . it is also worth noting that pioneering british astronauts such as helen sharman and major tim peake have made a significant contribution to space exploration . fast - forwarding to today , the uk space sector has a turnover of £ 17 billion or more and employs over 48,000 people , including 2,300 apprentices , in exciting roles . there is a notable space cluster in surrey , and my area of berkshire has significant space businesses , so this legislation affects many of our constituencies . space technology is not just for those involved in advanced manufacturing . it is for all of us . whether it is combating and measuring climate change , using and deploying rural broadband or supporting transport and agriculture , space is vital for security and resilience . satellite communications play an important role in communications across the world , and space provides opportunities for crucial economic growth , as the hon . member for woking mentioned , from cornwall all the way to shetland . indeed , aerospace research and development is a long - term endeavour , and our industrial strength in the uk is the result of decades of support by successive governments . we would seek to build on that legacy , including by developing spaceports and centres such as the north east space skills and technology centre , which has created over 350 jobs and injected around £ 260 million in the north - east economy . we have also proposed a regulatory innovation office to support our science , research , innovation and space ventures . our regulators must be responsive to innovation , from in - orbit manufacturing to space - based renewables . labour ’s regulatory innovation office would rewire regulators to support innovation , including in the space sector . the office would set and monitor targets for approvals , benchmarked internationally , and would give regulators steers from our wider industrial strategy . we would also support the regulatory horizons council , with deadlines for government to respond to its work . i will turn briefly to the importance of broader economic stability in supporting the uk ’s space sector . as well as regulation , industry desperately needs support and stability from government , and it is somewhat sad that the current government have failed to always offer that stability . the national space council was set up by one prime minister , sadly cancelled by the next , then reinstated by the one after that . in addition , the uk left galileo , a project we had done so much to bring about . the government subsequently made a u - turn on a rival system , which cost the taxpayer £ 60 million . the science , innovation and technology committee has expressed concerns about the lack of coherence in the current government space strategy . indeed , it has said this ambiguity added to harmful speculation about the oneweb eutelsat merger . unfortunately , the space industry plan was three months late , and it is unclear how the government see space relating to key technologies in the science and technology framework . in contrast , labour ’s industrial strategy , with our statutory industrial strategy council , will provide the stability and partnership the industry needs . turning to skills , when colleagues spoke at the uk space conference last year , attendees heard the same concerns mentioned by hon . members earlier : that we need to raise the profile of space careers to secure the skilled workforce that the industry demands . we propose a national skills body , skills england , to provide leadership and to bring together government , business , training providers and trade unions to meet local skills needs . we want to reform the apprenticeship levy to maximise the opportunities that learners have . expanding opportunities in the industry should , as was indicated earlier , help to create jobs for people from all backgrounds . space park leicester , where the university , local government and industry work together to make space more accessible to all , is an example of the developments we would like to support . if we were to enter government , we would want to see a cross - government action plan for diversity in stem . i would like to leave the minister with a few constructive questions . i hope he will address my points about stability and set out how the government will reassure business that britain is still a great place to invest in respect of commercial space ventures . in his response , will he agree with me that skills and training are vital to the sector , and that we must provide high - quality jobs for people from all backgrounds ? in conclusion , on the whole we support the space industry ( indemnities ) bill . adequate licensing will be a key contributor to creating important growth in the space sector . however , the space industry lacks stable long - term investment and support from the government . i look forward to the minister ’s response on these matters . i welcome i thank my hon . friend from the contributions we heard on second reading and in committee , we know how beneficial the bill will be to the many businesses in the uk ’s thriving space sector . the sector contributes over £ 17.5 billion to the uk economy and directly employs more than 48,000 people . the bill supports our government ’s ambition to make the uk the leading provider of commercial small satellite launch in europe by 2030 . we are harnessing the opportunities provided by launch , which will meet the aims set out in the national space strategy and the government ’s agenda to level up the uk . this will create skilled jobs around the uk , as well as inspiring the next generation of space professionals . to achieve our ambition , the government have already invested over £ 57 million through the launchuk programme to grow new uk markets for small satellite launch and sub - orbital space flights . growing our launch capability is already creating highly skilled jobs and opportunities right across the uk , as well as rocket boosting investment across the supply chain , supporting the government ’s aims to grow and level up the economy . my hon . friend is making a great speech , and i congratulate him on his introduction to the dispatch box . does he agree that , as i said earlier , the space industry is an excellent place for women and girls to consider , and does he see any particular area of the industry as important for women or girls to consider ? i thank my hon . friend . like , i am sure , many colleagues in the house , when i was a child i aspired to be an astronaut . unfortunately , i was not able to achieve that ambition , but i hope that in today ’s debate we will inspire the next generation to ask themselves why they can not be the next — buzz lightyear . the next buzz lightyear or equivalent in the years to come . we are at the forefront of a cutting - edge industry and are world leaders in many parts of it . i appeal to all colleagues , whenever they go to technical colleges , universities or schools in their constituencies , to inspire that generation to ask themselves , “ why not ? ” the government recognise that the question of liability and insurance is of utmost concern to the space sector . the industry has made it clear that facing unlimited liabilities could have an adverse effect on the uk space flight industry . if a space flight operator ’s liability was not limited , space flight companies and investors might move to other jurisdictions that have more favourable liability regimes . i congratulate my hon . friend on his debut at the dispatch box . i must anecdotally mention that , when i was first elected , we had a visit from a space shuttle crew . having real spacemen in parliament was terribly exciting . i want to press my hon . friend on a procedural point . he may know that the procedure committee is looking into the territorial constitution and how the scope of bills can extend beyond just westminster , and england and wales , and also looking at ensuring that we speak to our parliamentary colleagues in devolved and other parliaments . i note that the extent of the bill covers the whole of the uk , the channel islands , the isle of man and the overseas territories . he is welcome to write to me about this , but will he set out what work the government have done to ensure that parliaments around the united kingdom and others that are affected know about this bill , and whether we will be looking to get any legislative consent motions ? i thank my right hon . friend for that intervention . with her permission , i will make sure that i or another minister writes to her . as she correctly pointed out , shetland remains very important in the space space , and the bill incorporates all four corners of our great union . i was speaking about the liability regime , how operator liability is limited , and how other states provide guarantees to meet all claims — all those above the operator ’s limit on liability — such as the us or france , as has been discussed . that is why the space industry act 2018 contains powers to limit the amount of space flight operators ’ liability when carrying out space flight activities from the uk . it is government policy that the regulator should use these powers and specify a limit on operator liabilities in the licence . the bill is therefore fully consistent with government policy and , furthermore , improves the space industry act by meeting a key request from industry to provide legislative certainty that spaceflight operators will not face unlimited liability when operating from the uk . for those reasons , we are very pleased to support it . i was interested in the hon . gentleman ’s remarks about his childhood dream to be an astronaut . when i was a child , i recall one yuri gagarin circumnavigating the world , i think for 90 minutes . it seems like a very long time ago . i call mr jonathan lord to wind up . with the leave of the house , i would like to thank all members of this house for attending . for those who attended second reading , i am pleased that we had fewer space - related puns today , although it was a very humorous — and , beneath the humour , very serious — debate that went on for some time and covered all issues . i also thank those members who served on the bill committee , and the clerk of private members ’ bills , anne - marie griffiths , who has given such good help and advice to me and to other colleagues who have brought forward private members ’ bills in this session . our space industry is thriving , but this measure is vital to securing an equally exciting and dynamic future . i am so pleased that the bill has cross - party support . the shadow minister , it was a great honour to see my hon . friend speaking from the dispatch box — the first of many times , i am sure . this measure has cross - party support and , to ensure that exciting and dynamic future that i mentioned , i commend the bill to the house . question put and agreed to . bill accordingly read the third time and passed . i congratulate the hon . gentleman on his successful excursion into space . second reading i beg to move , that the bill be now read a second time . it is a huge privilege , having already had the pleasure of guiding my pet abduction bill through the commons this session , to have the opportunity to debate my other private member ’s bill , which i first introduced in the previous session . this bill , as the minister knows , would amend the animal welfare act 2006 to require a person in charge of a dog to take all reasonable steps to ensure that that dog does not fatally injure another dog , and would impose criminal liability if they fail to take reasonable steps and their dog fatally injures another dog . that is to plug a gap in the dangerous dogs act 1991 that was painfully brought to my attention , which i will come on to . before i go any further though , i thank the conservative animal welfare foundation , so ably led by lorraine and chris platt , for all its help in getting the bill as far as we have today . we all know that we are a nation of dog lovers . there are now some 12 million dogs in the uk ; that is more than the populations of essex , suffolk , norfolk , cambridgeshire , bedfordshire and hertfordshire combined , and then doubled . that works out to nearly half of all households in the uk having a dog . and we all know how loved our dogs are ; we only have to look at the excitements of the westminster dog of the year competition to see that . indeed , as the house well knows , my cavapoochon , lottie , is a much - loved member of our family . companionship is the most common reason for having a dog and that was absolutely the case for my constituent michael . michael was one of the first constituents who ever came to see me — in fact , he came to see me even before i became a member of this house — and he was so distressed and in such anguish that it was a pleasure to take up his cause . michael had a friend called emily , who sadly died , and he adopted her beautiful white fluffy bichon frisé bitch , millie , both to keep him company and to help him to grieve his friend , emily . however , around two and a half years ago , millie was savagely attacked by an off - lead , out - of - control dog while michael was walking her through the rose garden in chalkwell park in leigh - on - sea . michael remembers the attack as if it were yesterday . it was like watching a horror movie . he described how the dog came at millie like a missile , even though millie was on the lead , and “ shook her like a rag - doll . ” poor michael watched , helpless , as millie was literally torn apart . after the attack , the best he could do was carry her to the nearest vet ’s , all the while bleeding and with serious open wounds to her abdomen . to add insult to injury , the owner of the dog that attacked millie refused to take any responsibility for the attack , refusing to pay the vet ’s bills for euthanasia . no owner or dog should have to go through what michael and millie went through , and michael is devastated and scarred by that experience even to this day . obviously , he reported the matter to the police , but he was told there was nothing they could do because the incident was dog on dog and no human had been injured . you will know , mr deputy speaker , that dog - on - dog attacks are becoming more commonplace ; i am sure you have seen the extensive reports in the media and we only have to google “ dog - on - dog attacks ” to see a long list of news reports . just this month , on the loophole in the dangerous dogs act 1991 is unacceptable and that is why i chose to reintroduce the bill this session . i am aware that most presentation bills never make it on to the statute book , so i am pleased to report to the house that , as a result of the bill and of my lobbying the government , department for environment , food and rural affairs officials have been working with the crown prosecution service to update its prosecution guidance on dog attacks and attacks on other animals . that guidance now makes it explicit that a dog - on - dog attack can be prosecuted under section 3 of the dangerous dogs act , the offence of a dog being dangerously out of control . that is a good step forward , but the keyword is “ can ” — a lot of things can be prosecuted , but simply are not . i remain concerned primarily because there is no exhaustive definition of what a dog ’s being dangerously out of control actually means . for example , those same sentencing guidelines state that “ it does not follow that if the dog causes injury , the dog was dangerously out of control . ” we could therefore have the ludicrous situation where a dog kills another dog and it is not deemed to be dangerously out of control — if , for example , the owner of a dangerous dog deliberately sets it on a neighbour ’s dog . although the updated guidance is a step forward , it does not deal with the problem i seek to address . my hon . friend is making a powerful speech and giving some very upsetting and tragic examples of how dogs attack dogs . does she see similarities between this bill and the dogs ( protection of livestock ) ( amendment ) bill , which we discussed earlier , where the dogs have attacked livestock , and does she agree that more must be done to ensure that dog owners behave responsibly ? i thank my hon . friend for making that point , which is absolutely right . this is about placing responsibility on the owner , not criminalising the dog itself . that is exactly why i am bringing forward this private member ’s bill . when i first introduced the bill , i was contacted by many dog owners up and down the country , who shared heartbreaking tales about the loss of their treasured dogs . many of them have contacted me again and are delighted that the bill is being reintroduced today . let me deal first with the scale of the problem . the minister knows that , in order to support michael , i submitted freedom of information requests to all 43 territorial police forces in the uk , asking whether they record dog - on - dog attacks as a separate offence and , if so , how many they have recorded over the last five years . shockingly , only 14 police forces currently record a dog - a - dog attack as a separate incident . in 2016 , they recorded a total of 1,700 dog - on - dog attacks . five years on , the number had skyrocketed : in 2021 , the same 14 police forces recorded 11,559 dog - on - dog attacks — a 700 % increase — with a shocking 2,264 in london alone . the true incidence of dog - on - dog attacks is likely to be even higher , because the fact that a police force does not record dog - on - dog attacks as separate offences does not mean that they are not happening . on the current legislative framework , laws have been strengthened in recent years to protect the public where a dog presents a risk to public safety — whether in public or in private — but it remains the case that a dog owner is not automatically liable for any form of criminal prosecution when their dog fatally injures another , unless the other dog is a guide , assistance or service dog , the dog bites a human , or “ there are grounds for reasonable apprehension that it will injure any person ” . that sounds good — it is an objective test — but it is not universally applied , and the proof of the pudding is what happened in michael ’s case . he was asked whether he wanted to press for some sort of prosecution , but he said that he had not feared for his own safety . it had been clear that the dog was going for the smaller dog , and michael did not fear that there was a danger to himself at that point . the law does not adequately cover this type of incident , and pet dogs should have the same protection as guide , assistance and service dogs , because the loss that is felt by a family following the death of their beloved companion is the same , if not more . my hon . friend is making an eloquent speech . some of the most distressing cases that have come into my inbox over the years have involved a precious pet facing these sorts of circumstances . i completely agree with her that , if we can make laws to protect guide dogs and assistance dogs , we should be able to do the same for precious pets , which mean so much to so many families . i agree . that is exactly what this bill — emilie ’s law — seeks to do . it will close the loophole and deal with this issue as a matter of animal welfare , placing responsibility on the dog owner . it is not about dogs , because dogs have owners . the owners should be responsible . i am listening with considerable interest . there are a large number of farmers in my area , and some of them are sheep farmers . one of their complaints is that people stray on to their land with their dogs and often let them go . let us imagine a situation in which a farmer is bringing in his sheep and has sent out his huntaway , which disappears over the brow . unbeknown to him , a stray dog attacks the huntaway , which will probably be bigger than most dogs , and the stray dog is killed . who is to blame ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for his intervention . as i said at the beginning of my speech , the bill is about placing responsibility on a dog owner to take all reasonable steps . in that instance , it may be that the farmer has taken all reasonable steps , in which case there would not be liability ; if he has not , he would potentially be caught by the bill . first , the bill would criminalise fatal dog - on - dog attacks , extending the same protection to pet dogs that already exists for service , guide and assistance dogs . secondly , emilie ’s law would empower owners to pursue justice if their beloved pet is brutally attacked , while not demonising any particular breed or creating unhelpful stereotypes around certain breeds of dog . as i have said , the issue is poor ownership . thirdly , the bill would encourage responsible dog ownership and animal welfare by placing the responsibility for a fatal dog attack fairly and squarely on the person in charge of the dog , and empowering the police to take action , which will have a deterrent effect , thus encouraging more responsible dog ownership . it is important to note that the bill also includes a number of defences for good owners who are not to blame if their dog causes a fatality , such as if the dog that caused the fatal injury was responding to provocation from another animal or human , and the steps taken by the responsible person to prevent the situation from escalating . the point is to keep the onus on owners but ensure that they are dealt with fairly , and not punish them for a situation out of their control . finally , my bill would ensure that local police forces record dog - on - dog attacks as separate offences , enabling us finally to see the full scale of these offences . the bill is about protecting every single dog across the uk . the vast majority of dog owners are responsible but , for those who are not , there must be consequences . passing the bill would make our dogs safer , and it would also make our parks , streets , towns and cities — especially the new city of southend — safer places for us and our dogs to live , work and visit . finally , the bill would send yet another signal to the world that we in the uk take animal welfare seriously , and make us the international exemplar that we all know we are . i have left just a little time , in which i hope to hear from the minister . i thank i found the story of millie and her owner michael deeply moving . the hon . lady was right to describe the attack as being like a horror movie . i had a similar case in my constituency of reading east , where an attack happened in cintra park — a local park — and a woman who was walking her beloved pet dog had that dog savaged by a much larger dog , which was well known in that area of the town . unfortunately , because it was a dog - on - dog attack , there were no powers available to local police to tackle that terrible incident — it was absolutely appalling . the little dog that was attacked had to be taken for surgery and is lucky to have survived . therefore , i think the bill is well researched and the hon . lady ’s points well made . i seek clarification from the minister on whether dogs that are not killed but severely injured could be protected by the bill . i hope for good news on that front . in that spirit , may i offer the official opposition ’s support for the bill ? i look forward to hearing the minister ’s response , with more detail on that point and other related matters . i thank the hon . lady again for her hard work on this important area of policy . i must , of course , begin by thanking my hon . friend the debate stood adjourned ( ordered , that the debate be resumed on motion made , that the bill be now read a second time . object . bill to be read a second time on resumption of adjourned debate on question ( object . debate to be resumed on motion made , that the bill be now read a second time . object . bill to be read a second time on motion made , that the bill be now read a second time . object . bill to be read a second time on i rise to present a petition on the recommendations of the infected blood inquiry on behalf of the residents of my constituency . the petition “ declares that people who received infected blood and who have suffered as a consequence , have , along with their families , waited far too long for redress . ” this includes margaret and catherine , the widows of brothers bill and michael payne , who were just two of the boys infected with contaminated blood at the now infamous treloars school . these were boys with haemophilia , supposedly under specialist care , but — in the words of another former pupil — they were treated like lab rats . the petition also states : “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to implement the recommendations in the second interim report of the infected blood inquiry without delay . and the petitioners remain , etc . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of bristol east , declares that people who received infected blood and who have suffered as a consequence have , along with their families , waited for too long for redress . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to implement the recommendations in the second interim report of the infected blood inquiry without delay . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p002992 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(rebecca harris . ) i am proud to represent nearly 15,000 muslims as their mp in parliament . the all - party parliamentary group on british muslims recently informed me that my constituency has the 70th largest muslim population in the country , and i know from my time as a westminster city councillor , and now as an mp , of the key role that british muslims play in making the two cities such a proudly multicultural and welcoming place in which to live . since being elected , i have worked with a large number and a wide variety of organisations in my constituency , including those supporting my muslim constituents , such as the westminster bangladeshi welfare trust and the westminster bangladeshi association , both of which have supported their communities for many years . last month i was delighted to be invited to attend eid celebrations on the churchill gardens estate in pimlico , organised by the residents association , led by their impressive chairman christina walsh . the event brought together local people of all faiths and none to celebrate this deeply significant religious festival , enabling us to enjoy it as a community no matter what our background . it was a very special afternoon , and i was delighted to be able to continue to learn more about the ummah community and , in turn , about the hajj journey that so many of my constituents will make next month . let me explain to those who do not already know that hajj is the pilgrimage to the holy city of mecca in saudi arabia , the birthplace of the prophet mohammed , which every adult muslim is expected to undertake in his or her lifetime if financially and physically able to do so . from speaking to muslim friends about their experiences of hajj , i know what a special and significant time it is for them . hajj is the fifth of the fundamental muslim practices known as the five pillars of islam , and is obligatory . the pilgrim rites begin on the seventh day of dhu al - hijja , the last month of the islamic year , and end on the 12th day . as it is based on the lunar calendar , this year hajj is expected to begin on despite its religious importance , many travelling from the uk to mecca to perform hajj are sadly not immune to targeting by fraudsters . i learned at first hand about hajj - related fraud on a recent visit to the city of london police , based in my constituency , where i met commander umer khan . the city of london police take the national lead on fraud , and thus hajj - related fraud court cases come under its jurisdiction . commander khan is leading the force ’s nationwide efforts to highlight how to prevent being a victim of hajj - related fraud , and i would like to take this opportunity to thank him and his team for their outstanding work . according to the police , only 3 % of hajj - related fraud is actually reported . the reasons for such low reporting can be multifaceted . some may not wish to report the crime as they booked through a contact of someone they know in their community or from their mosque ; others may wish not to complain due to embarrassment or shame . we often hear these reasons from victims of whatever fraud , in whatever circumstances . one of the reasons i applied for this debate is to send a clear message to our british muslim community that they should feel safe and confident that they will be taken seriously if they report a suspected fraud . due to the low levels of reporting , we simply can not know the full extent of what i think is a heinous crime . in my discussions with city of london police officers about hajj - related fraud , they informed me that they have accidentally come across incidences of fraud , but are finding it increasingly difficult to receive reports of this crime . my hon . friend is making an eloquent speech . as a former deputy leader of westminster city council , i know the importance of the muslim community there , just as i have an important muslim community in woking . my hon . friend is making a good point : the message must go out to members of this house that we should speak with religious and community leaders locally to ensure that this heinous crime is reported . as i say , i have a large muslim community , but i have not heard of this before . it sounds terrible . my hon . friend is absolutely right . before i went on my visit with the city of london police , which takes the lead on this , and met commander khan , i was not aware of it either . it is important that we highlight these hidden crimes . i would like to take this opportunity to congratulate my hon . friend on securing his third private member ’s bill of his political career so far . i want to highlight the importance of ensuring that members of the muslim community in this country know that if they are victims of any type of fraud , but particularly hajj - related fraud , they can inform the police and have it investigated properly . the city of london police believe that one of the reasons for low levels of reporting may be traditional attitudes that persist : having become “ pure ” as a hajji , the person involved may not want to speak of such worldly things as fraud on their pilgrimage . those who suspect that they have been a victim of any type of fraud should report it straightaway to action fraud , the national fraud and cyber - crime reporting service , which is available online at actionfraud.police.uk . every year , 25,000 british muslims travel to mecca in saudi arabia to undertake their hajj . many will have saved for years in the knowledge that it will be a once in a lifetime trip . brits who take part in the pilgrimage spend a combined £ 125 million each year . these costs include return flights , accommodation , and paying for a guide . data obtained from the police.uk website show that , sadly , police forces have reported hajj - related fraud where british citizens have lost anything from £ 1,000 up to a staggering £ 33,000 to fraudsters , who promised to arrange their hajj travel and accommodation but had no intention of ever doing so , and were never heard from again . those shopping around for the best deal for their trip to mecca , both in their local community and increasingly online — particularly on social media — have been attracted to packages covering flights , accommodation and visas , which appear to offer good value for money . some rogue operators advertise large reductions on what would usually be charged . accommodation advertised as a 4 - star hotel is , in reality on arrival , found to be barely the quality of a 1 - star place . i have heard reports of flights being deliberately over - subscribed , leading to people failing to make the trip at all , and of people posing as travel agents , charging extortionate prices for visas — up to £ 1,000 each — when they are actually free . i have heard of travellers being asked to pay in cash or make a direct bank transfer prior to their trip , and being told that they would receive their tickets and travel documents nearer to the departure date , never to be received . a once in a lifetime trip , often using life savings , ends in heartbreak . i can not imagine the distress and upset that must cause people so looking forward to undertaking their hajj . as we lead up to this year ’s hajj , i thought it important to highlight the dangers that fraudsters can pose to our citizens at this special time , and to ensure that people know that there is a way to protect themselves from becoming victims of hajj - related fraud . in response to tackling this fraud , which affects not just british muslims but those planning their pilgrimage from across the world , the saudi arabian government have acted decisively . it is important to highlight that this is a global fraud issue . i read with interest in arab news yesterday that the iraqi authorities have prosecuted more than 25 companies fraudulently engaging in commercial hajj operations . in 2022 , knowing that hajj - related fraud was increasingly an issue , the saudi arabian ministry of hajj and umrah created the nusuk hajj portal , which has changed the way that individuals book their pilgrimage . the portal is available in over 50 countries , including the united kingdom , and was created to provide a seamless and safe pilgrimage booking experience . by centralising the process by which visas are acquired , much of the fraud has been stifled , thankfully . it is imperative that individuals book their hajj trips only through the nusuk portal . anyone posing as a provider of visas or trips to mecca for hajj is simply misleading people . sadly , even after the creation of the nusuk hajj portal and despite its success in reducing fraud , the criminal fraternity continues — as it always does — to attempt to find new avenues to try to take advantage . my advice to hajjis is to remain vigilant about what is being sold and by whom . i still receive reports of individuals being sold umrah visas and generic tourist visas and being told that they are acceptable for their hajj pilgrimage . that is not the case . people can only travel with a hajj visa from the nusuk portal . the other visas allow access at any other time of year , but for hajj period , those reliant on those visas will not be permitted entry to mecca . it is important to note that hajj - related fraud is not just about people buying a package that simply does not exist ; it also involves profiteering from a sacred pilgrimage . the fraudsters involved are , to my mind , the lowest of the low . i thank the groups that work tirelessly to highlight the importance of protecting people from hajj - related fraud and encouraging the use of the nusuk hajj portal . as well as commander khan and the city of london police , i must thank i met the hon . member recently to discuss hajj - related fraud , and she was clear that trading standards departments up and down the country , and specifically in birmingham , have worked hard to uncover such criminal activity , bring those involved to justice , and ensure that the wider muslim community is aware of possible fraud and the importance of using the nusuk hajj portal . by highlighting and encouraging the use of the portal among british muslims , i hope that we can tackle hajj - related fraud once and for all . after all , this is uk finance ’s take five week — a week designed to raise awareness of and help tackle all types of fraud . i look forward to hearing from the minister how his department and the government in general will support british muslims this year and every year to ensure that they can enjoy their pilgrimage without fear of exploitation and disappointment . let me start by thanking my hon . friend my hon . friend set out clearly the way that hajj fraud operates . exploitative criminals prey on hard - working families to dupe them out of their money , sometimes using fake websites and other means to persuade people to pay for goods or services that are not forthcoming . i echo the advice that my hon . friend gave people to make sure that they book visas only via the properly authorised route . when booking travel via a travel agent , it is essential to make sure that the travel agency or tour operator is a member of the association of british travel agents , to carefully check online reviews , to make sure that the travel company is atol - protected by the civil aviation authority , and to make sure that the flight details and hajj visa are valid . those are all steps that people can and should take to protect themselves and make sure the counterparty they are dealing with is a legitimate organisation . we also strongly advise people never to pay by cash or by direct bank transfer into someone ’s personal bank account . the government are committed to tackling both hajj fraud and fraud more widely . i am pleased to report that overall , fraud is falling , with the latest data from the crime survey for england and wales showing a 16 % reduction year on year . but i am afraid to say that fraud remains the most common crime type , accounting for about 37 % of all crime . that means that one in every 18 adults was a victim of fraud in the last year . that is why we must clamp down on all forms of fraud , including hajj fraud . that is encapsulated in our fraud strategy , published almost exactly a year ago , which entails investing about £ 100 million to improve law enforcement capabilities and launching a new national fraud squad , with 400 specialist investigators in post . it also includes steps to replace the action fraud service this year , which has been the subject of some criticism , to ensure victims of fraud have the confidence to come forward knowing their case will be dealt with properly . we are also cracking down on fraudsters online . we know that many cases of hajj fraud have an online element , which requires particular vigilance . when the online safety act 2023 is fully enacted , it will help the regulator ofcom to hold to account online social media platforms if they allow fraud to proliferate . that will take time to come into force fully , so to protect people even sooner , we have agreed the online fraud charter with 12 of the largest tech companies , including amazon , ebay , meta and google . that was entered into last november and includes a series of voluntary actions that they will take . when the 2023 act comes fully into force , it will compel large social media platforms to take proactive steps to combat fraud , including hajj fraud . as my hon . friend said , public awareness is critical , as is people taking steps to protect themselves . that is why the “ stop ! think fraud ” national behaviour change campaign is so important . it encourages the public to always stop and think before they make a payment , and ask themselves , “ is it possible i am being defrauded ? is the counterparty legitimate ? what can i do to check their credentials before making that payment ? ” criminals are becoming increasingly sophisticated , often now using artificial intelligence to generate images or even videos designed to trick people into paying money . the public ’s vigilance is therefore extremely important , alongside the law enforcement response through the fraud strategy and the actions we are taking to compel large online platforms to be more proactive in stopping fraud proliferating online . in conclusion , i am very grateful to my hon . friend for raising this issue on behalf of her muslim communities in the cities of london and westminster . my hon . friend question put and agreed to . house adjourned .