much of the content of lord darzi ’s report has been known for some years . none the less , today ’s report is a scathing summary of the complete devastation that the conservatives have wrought on our health services and on the health of our communities . we liberal democrats have long argued that we need to shift healthcare from hospitals to high streets , and from treatment to prevention , because doing so improves health outcomes and saves taxpayers ’ money . it is a win - win . but the report is long on diagnosis and short on prescription , so may i invite ministers to read our fully costed manifesto to fix public health and primary care by recruiting 8,000 gps , ending dental deserts , boosting public health grants by £ 1 million , implementing our five - year plan to boost cancer survival rates , and putting a mental health expert in every school ? does the secretary of state accept that there is an elephant in the room : social care ? will he meet me to discuss the liberal democrat plans for social care , starting with free personal care ? this bold idea would prevent many people from going into hospital in the first place , as well as enabling them to be discharged from hospital faster . does he accept that it is a truth universally acknowledged that we can not fix the nhs if we do not fix social care too ? as for the dire state of our hospitals and primary care estate , well , the conservatives have left it to fester like a wound . will the secretary of state give the green light to hospitals that are ready to rebuild , such as mine in west hertfordshire ? will ministers look to reform outdated treasury rules that are preventing our integrated care boards and hospital trusts from spending and investing their funds in the gp practices and hospitals that we need ? this government say that they want growth . well , health and wealth are two sides of the same coin , which is something the conservatives do not understand . if labour wants economic growth , fixing our health and social care must be its top priority . and it must be a priority without delay . on tuesday , i was at the birmingham children ’s hospital . will the secretary of state join me in congratulating the excellent staff on their work and their commitment to each individual patient who goes through the door ? that evening , i was also with a local gp at sparkbrook health centre whose frustration was with the outdated computer system . if he could get one message across to the secretary of state , it would be that he has to reboot his computer numerous times a day . will the secretary of state put resources in to ensure that the it is up to date ? thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to make my maiden speech . i thank all hon . members for their fine contributions , including my hon . friend it is the greatest honour of my life to serve the people of stratford - on - avon . i am humbled to have been elected to represent the place that i call home , where i live and where i have raised my family , who are here today in the public gallery . i am proud to be the first liberal mp for our constituency in over a century , and the first woman ever to be elected to this role . i extend my heartfelt thanks to the people of stratford , alcester , studley , shipston , henley , bidford and the many villages and hamlets that make up our beautiful constituency . i thank them for placing their trust in me . i promise to be their champion , and a strong and unwavering voice for everyone , fighting every day for the fair deal that they deserve . i pay tribute to my predecessor , nadhim zahawi , who was mp for stratford - on - avon for the last 14 years . during his political career he covered many important roles in the cabinet , but i thank him in particular for his work as vaccines minister during the covid pandemic . i also acknowledge the service of the late john maples , who represented stratford - upon - avon with distinction from 1997 to 2010 , before being elevated to the other place . he was both well liked and greatly admired . although i am proud to be the first female mp for stratford - upon - avon , i am not the first to bring italian heritage to the role . that distinction belongs to another of my predecessors , john profumo , who beat me to it — although i plan on a much quieter stay in the history books . my constituency is one of the most beautiful areas of our country , with luscious woodland such as the heart of england forest , valleys lapped by rivers and brooks , and fertile farmland — a landscape special as only the warwickshire countryside can be . my connection to my constituency is one of deep love . i love the stretches from shipston - on - stour and the rolling cotswolds fringes in the south , to the avon valley villages and henley - in - arden in the north , where the majestic forest of arden once stood . at the heart of my constituency lies the town of stratford - upon - avon , celebrated worldwide as the birthplace of the greatest playwright of all : william shakespeare . each year on william ’s birthday , the town remembers and celebrates its most famous son , with civic dignitaries and local schoolchildren parading through the historic streets to lay flowers on his tomb in holy trinity church . i look forward to joining them next april . what makes our constituency special above all is its people , who are resilient and community minded . each town and village is blessed with warm - hearted volunteers helping in repair cafés , food banks , the community speed watch and flood action groups . there are outstanding places of learning , such as our local schools and colleges , the shakespeare institute of the university of birmingham , and the university of warwick ’s innovation campus ; national portfolio organisations such as the royal shakespeare company and the shakespeare birthplace trust ; as well as grassroots arts companies such as the bear pit theatre and escape arts . events such as the shipston proms celebrate the wealth of musical talent . most of all , we are a constituency of entrepreneurs and innovators , businesses and social enterprises . overlooked by beaudesert castle — known locally as “ the mount”—the town of henley - in - arden has a timber - framed high street , which includes henley ’s most famous attraction , henley ice cream , which is well worth a visit . alcester is a town rich in community spirit that comes together each year for events such as the alcester food festival . the town ’s roots stretch back to roman times , and its heritage is proudly preserved today in the roman alcester museum . just up the road from alcester is coughton court , home of the throckmorton family , who played a rather infamous role in the gunpowder plot of 1605 . as the new mp for the area , i assure the house that i will not continue that local tradition . my constituency also has some of the most beautiful waterways in the country . the rivers avon , alne , arrow and stour , and our fantastic canal network , including the longest canal aqueduct in england — the edstone aqueduct — are not only vital to our community ’s natural and industrial heritage , but are central to our environmental responsibilities . sadly , not enough has been done to tackle river pollution . i thank residents for joining citizens ’ science projects to regularly test the water and collect much - needed data on the state of our rivers ’ health , so that we can hold the government and water companies to account . as a rural constituency , we face many challenges : nhs dentistry deserts , long waiting times for mental health services , special educational needs and disabilities families battling for education provision , and fuel poverty . many of my vulnerable constituents live in off - grid homes that are expensive to heat . the warm homes and energy conservation act 2000 , introduced by sir david amess , was important legislation that sought to eliminate fuel poverty . to further combat it , we need an emergency home insulation programme so that homes are safe , warm and cheap to heat . as shakespeare wrote : “ some are born great , some achieve greatness , and others have greatness thrust upon ’em . ” i stand here today not because i was born great , or because i sought greatness , but because the people of stratford - upon - avon have entrusted me with public service . together , we can achieve greatness not for ourselves , but for our constituents and our country . with a new parliament , we have a chance to strive for a fairer , greener and more inclusive future . the stage is set , and it is now time for us to play our part . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for allowing me the opportunity to make my maiden speech in this debate . it is an honour to follow i would like to start by paying tribute to my predecessor , sir david evennett , who represented our local area for 33 years , first in the former erith and crayford constituency and then in bexleyheath and crayford . he took a keen interest in education , serving twice as a parliamentary private secretary in the education department . he was elected with the other sir david in 1983 and they were close friends , and it is apt that this debate is named after sir david amess . sir david evennett was the only conservative member of parliament to lose their seat in 1997 and then regain it at the second attempt in 2005 , which says a great deal about his tenacity , and i wish him and marilyn a happy and healthy retirement . i note that when sir david evennett made his maiden speech in 1983 , he followed and complimented the then member for sedgefield , who of course went on to be a great prime minister for 10 years , so i say to the right hon . member for rayleigh and wickford , please feel no pressure in the years ahead . at this election , my constituency of bexleyheath and crayford gained parts of the northumberland heath and west heath wards that were previously represented by my hon . friend i have lived in the london borough of bexley all of my life , attended local schools and served as a councillor for 20 years . my constituents include former school friends , former work colleagues , my parents , who are here today , and my grandmother . my constituency is located at the south - east tip of london , with my constituents looking both west into the capital and east across the kent boundary . my family roots are like those of many of my constituents : families from south london who moved a bit further east , with my maternal roots in southwark and my paternal roots in plumstead . we in the constituency are proud of two amazing heritage assets : the grade 1 listed hall place , built in 1537 ; and the red house , designed by philip webb and william morris in 1859 . we are also proud of our contribution to the hits of my childhood , having been the birthplace of boy george and kate bush . we have an industrial past , with the thames at the north of the constituency , but today most jobs are in manufacturing , retail and hospitality . however , that past helped change history and ensure that britain is the country it is today . the vickers works were located in crayford for 101 years , from 1884 , and during the world wars they manufactured the vickers machine gun , aircraft , naval gun laying equipment , and the casings for the barnes wallis bouncing bomb of dambusters fame . famously , it was where the british aviators john alcock and arthur brown manufactured the first vickers vimy bomber , with the first 12 manufactured in crayford , while it was the thirteenth , manufactured elsewhere , which in 1919 made the first non - stop transatlantic flight . that history of our constituency continues today with my constituents across barnehurst , bexleyheath , crayford , northumberland heath , slade green , and the small parts of abbey wood , belvedere , erith and welling that i represent , working hard and delivering for our country . every day i speak to local residents who work in the public sector , and i know how grateful their neighbours are for the work they do and on which we all rely . my constituents rely on train services provided by thameslink and southeastern , which have a depot in slade green where they maintain rolling stock and train staff . it is those railway workers who keep my constituents on the move . those commuters work in the financial and professional jobs that london relies on , but also , importantly , in shops , restaurants and hotels , keeping london ’s economy moving . and if we take a quick glance around any road in my constituency , we see a variety of white vans and black taxis , demonstrating that my constituents are the workers that london relies on to get them from a to b , and the builders , plumbers , brickies and lift engineers who will help us grow our economy . but there is one set of workers on which our community really does rely : our volunteers and carers . today , my day started as many others ’ will have done : i lifted my child from her bed ; i changed her nappy , dressed her , fed her and tidied her hair ; and then i ensured that she was in her wheelchair and ready for her transport to collect her for school . our children are twins but will lead very different paths in life . one talks of a future in work and the journeys she will make ; the other , after many years of work from professionals , can now manage to talk , but her language is limited to about a dozen words . the eldest of our twins has cerebral palsy and a range of complex disabilities . like other carers , the greatest concern that my wife and i have is what will happen to her when we are gone . many of us know what it was like to have to work and educate our children at home for months during the covid pandemic . in our case , this was stretched by the fact that one of our children requires full - time care , our family network and carers were not allowed into our home , and my wife was undergoing chemotherapy at the time — she is now thankfully recovered , due to the fantastic work of our incredible nhs . i can assure members that in my time in this house i will be the greatest of champions for carers and the disabled , because i really do know the challenges that families in our position face on a daily basis : having to fight the local authority because either it has not transferred the money to pay the carer , or it is not paying at a rate that meets minimum wage requirements ; the constant battle to ensure that our child has a wheelchair that works ; the arguments over which part of the public sector will fund the person required to cut our child ’s food at lunchtime because the education , health and care plan is not clear on the matter . i could take the easy path and sit at home rather than be here taking difficult decisions to fix the inheritance bequeathed to this government , but i believe that this house really does need people like me , who know how badly reform is needed in the special educational needs system and for the rights of carers . my constituents , like me , rely on volunteers and charities across the constituency . i am not going to name them , because as i am bound to miss one out , but those charities know that i have the greatest admiration for them , having worked alongside them for many years . they make such an important contribution across bexleyheath and crayford , and i look forward to continuing to work with them , our faith groups , businesses and my incredible constituents to deliver the change that our community and our country so desperately need . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i want to start by congratulating hon . friends and other hon . members on some fantastic maiden speeches today , but also on the many i have heard since the election in july . they have made me proud to be british . however , notwithstanding those incredible speeches and hearing about the amazing and beautiful places across the uk , i would still argue that southampton , the place where i was born and bred , where i have always lived and which i have the honour to represent as the member of parliament for southampton test , is the best city on earth . listen , i know it is a bold claim and many will have heard me make it before , but southampton is where the world meets britain . we have helped shape the world and we continue to do so , from the pilgrims who set sail from southampton on the mayflower over 400 years ago in search of a new life in america , to being the home of the spitfire , which helped to defeat fascism in europe during world war two . it was the university of southampton that invented the internet as we know it today . and were those achievements not enough , southampton also gave the world the fishfinger sandwich — you’re welcome . we are a city rich with culture , from our medieval walls that protected our nation in times of conflict to our award - winning parks , most notably southampton common , which are the green lungs of our city , and our renowned art galleries and our theatre , the mayflower . southampton is where jane austen was schooled and lived , and it inspired some of her masterpieces . even today , southampton continues to produce great talent , from the singer craig david to “ masterchef ” winner shelina permalloo . southampton is also a world - leading maritime city that is integral to the uk economy . the port of southampton handles over £ 71 billion - worth of trade every year , while also serving as the busiest cruise port in europe . we are a city of political firsts . many will know that our country ’s first prime minister of colour is from southampton . i was the first female sikh council leader in the uk . and the former mp for southampton test , my good friend dr alan whitehead , was the first , and i believe the only politician , to have a song dedicated to them by none other than led zeppelin — clearly , they have a “ whole lotta love ” for alan . now , paying tribute to alan whitehead as my predecessor in this chamber is an honour . he has been one of those unique politicians who was universally liked , valued , and respected on both sides of the house . his knowledge on climate change and green energy is unparalleled . he is essentially the taylor swift of the energy sector . [ laughter . ] i ’m pleased you got it . he leaves behind a legacy , not only of shaping government policy on energy right now but of benefiting future generations , for which we all owe him a huge debt of gratitude . as i approach my 40th birthday in the coming days—[hon . members : “ surely not ! ” ] i know ! it is incredible to think that alan has served our city for as long as i have been alive , first as leader of the council and then as a member of parliament . he has done so with unwavering dedication , integrity and kindness , meaning that he will be sorely missed by many . i am acutely aware that i have very big shoes to fill . alan , and the former member of parliament for southampton itchen , john denham , have both been instrumental in helping me to reach this place today . indeed , john , on a visit to my school fair , awarded me first prize , when i was only eight years old , for my fancy dress costume . i do not know what it was about me dressing up as a clown that made john think that i might one day be destined for a career in politics . the truth is that i owe so much to my incredible city and the remarkable people of southampton who gave me the opportunity to be where i am today . southampton has made me who i am . as someone who grew up in one of southampton ’s most deprived communities , i saw at first hand the importance of community and service to others . southampton has a unique ability to come together when it is needed most . i have been inspired time and time again by the many examples set by our faith organisations , local businesses and incredible local charities , from love southampton , a faith - based initiative , to businesses such as the saints pub on the millbrook estate , and charities like yellow door , no limits and saints foundation . all work tirelessly to make southampton a better place , and remind us that when we lift our poorest and most vulnerable in society , that lifts everyone . our city ’s diversity has made me realise that we are the great place we are because of it — historic , but modern , dynamic , creative , and so much more . i may stand here as our constituency ’s first female mp and mp of colour , but i know that there are many more before me who have paved the way . i feel that responsibility here as well , and feel their weight on my shoulders . as a graduate of southampton ’s two world - class universities — the university of southampton , and then solent university — i know that they put our city on the map , and that both are institutions that inspire , innovate and push boundaries . they have helped me , and our city , to be more forward - thinking and outward - looking . as a saints fan , i must confess that supporting our team is a bit of an emotional rollercoaster , which has taught me , above anything else , enormous resilience . we are thankfully back in the premier league , but whether we are winning or losing , together as one city we march on . i am incredibly proud of southampton and everything it represents , but like any major city , we know that we face challenges . one in every three children lives below the poverty line , and life expectancy can drop by 10 years simply by being the wrong side of a bridge . public services are on their knees , and many families i represent are struggling . that is why i want to be part of the renewal that this labour government are promising , and want to rebuild the services on which my communities rely — from a decent home becoming a basic human right to people feeling safe in our streets and neighbourhoods again ; from having access to healthcare when it is needed to protecting our environment and rivers . another key priority of mine is to ensure that we create opportunities for all , and include the excluded . we know that children from poor areas or ethnic minority backgrounds , or those with disabilities , are not less talented ; they are simply given fewer opportunities . britain ’s talent is spread evenly across our communities and our country . if we are to realise our potential , we must ensure that those opportunities are spread more evenly too . these challenges will not be easy to resolve , but the people of southampton , like so many across britain , are rightfully proud and ambitious for themselves , their families and their country . that is why we need a government who are equally ambitious , and committed to unlocking the potential and opportunities of places like southampton . i know that , as a city , we stand ready to seize this moment to thrive and grow — and the drive , passion , compassion , togetherness and determination of the people of southampton will see it through . let me end by saying directly to them : i will be forever grateful to you for making this daughter of a market stall trader , who grew up in our inner city on free school meals , your member of parliament . you are the very best of me , and i am a product of every opportunity that you have given me . i shall never take that trust for granted , and i will spend every day , in here and beyond , championing our great city , fighting for it , and helping us to reach our enormous potential . i congratulate all hon . members who have delivered their maiden speech . they have all spoken about their constituency with wit , passion and enthusiasm , and i have no doubt that they will be strong representatives for their constituents . it is a real privilege to deliver my maiden speech during the sir david amess general debate . sir david was a stalwart member of this house and was barbarically murdered in the line of parliamentary duty . as i stand here in this most historic of chambers , i look over to sir david ’s memorial plaque behind the government benches and , as i start life as a member of parliament , i hope i can be a strong voice and a man of action for my constituents , as sir david was for his . i start with a heartfelt thank you to the people of exmouth and exeter east , for they are the reason i am here . they have put their trust in me to represent them as the first member of parliament for our new constituency . it is a responsibility that will always weigh heavily on my shoulders . i also say thank you to my family and campaign team , who have been bastions of love and support through the long journey to this place . for the record , i want it to be known that getting married during the early stages of a general election campaign makes for an interesting start . thank you to my wife for being a constant voice of reason and my rock throughout . although exmouth and exeter east is a new constituency , it was created by amalgamating areas from three previous constituencies , of which east devon was by far the largest contributor . referring to all my predecessors , as is custom in a maiden speech , may , therefore , mark me to the speaker ’s office as someone who does not abide by time limits . i say this because all three of my predecessors have made significant contributions to local and national life . simon jupp , the former member for east devon , worked hard for his constituents and campaigned relentlessly as chair of the all - party parliamentary group for the great south - west . he helped to secure investment into the region and always championed our part of the world . i consider simon to be a friend , and his contribution to this house will be missed , as will his encyclopaedic knowledge of local devon ciders . exmouth and exeter east also incorporates one ward each from the exeter and central devon constituencies . lastly , i have been blessed to inherit the beautiful exe valley from my right hon . friend for those who have not had the good fortune to visit exmouth and exeter east , please allow me to indulge in a cook ’s tour of my new constituency , and to give members a flavour of the geography , the history , the settlements , the people and the organisations that make my part of the world so irresistibly enchanting . starting at the mouth of the river exe , going out to the heathlands of woodbury common and finishing in the countryside above the city of exeter , the constituency of exmouth and exeter east has it all : beautiful beaches ; serene , open and arable landscapes ; the eastern part of a thriving city ; vibrant towns ; and picturesque villages . many parts of my new constituency have been inhabited for several millennia , with areas such as topsham being settled by the celts , turned into a port by the romans and expanded by the saxons . possibly our most famous resident has been sir walter raleigh who was an elizabethan statesman , soldier , writer and explorer . although he achieved much in his life , i will do my best not to meet the same fate , which was to be tried for treason before meeting his end outside this chamber in old palace yard . we have some fantastic organisations across exmouth and exeter east , such as the royal national lifeboat institution , which works tirelessly to keep locals and tourists safe in the waters around the constituency . we have global experts working to advance the frontiers of knowledge on weather and climate at the met office ’s headquarters . we have clinton devon estates , which is ably responsible for the stewardship of much of the land in the southern area of the constituency . as an example , the clinton devon estates team , working with the environment agency , recently demonstrated to the world how to proactively regenerate land by completing the lower otter restoration project . as is to be expected , we are fortunate to have some of the best farming produce anywhere in the country . for those looking to visit , i highly recommend stopping in for a pasty at darts farm or greendale farm shop . however , the organisation that has the most special place in my heart is commando training centre royal marines . for decades , the training camp in lympstone and the area of woodbury common have been the proving ground for all wannabe royal marines , and for those from across our armed forces who aspire to become commandos . having endured royal marine commando training over 16 years ago , i am happy to announce that i have learned , once again , to enjoy spending time on woodbury common , without fear of being cold , wet , hungry and covered in gorse thistles . the royal marines is a proud organisation , in its 360th year in service to our country . sadly it had become increasingly rare for a former royal marine to enter this house as a member . however , royal marines must share the same tendencies that buses are afflicted by : none turn up for eons , then four turn up at the same time . although the other three former royal marines , the hon . and gallant members for plymouth moor view ( fred thomas ) , for halesowen ( alex ballinger ) and for birmingham selly oak ( al carns ) opted to join the party now in government , i know that the kinship that binds royal marines together through shared adversity will benefit this house , and , i hope , provide combative but constructive debate . while exmouth and exeter east has much to be celebrated , it also has its fair share of issues . from an aged and degraded sewerage network to antisocial behaviour , there are many issues that my constituents have placed trust in me to help improve . for too long we have built new houses in the area without delivering appropriate and corresponding infrastructure . i fear the new government ’s top - down housing targets will further compound that issue , and i will do all i can to ensure that the right mix of houses are built , in the right places , with the right infrastructure and public consultation . i am also deeply concerned that large parts of exmouth and exeter east will be tarmacked over within one generation . of course we need new homes for the next generation , so that they can live near their friends , family and work , but we must have a tempered approach and ensure that we do not overdevelop and destroy our countryside , and the culture of our historic towns and villages . there are also areas that i will work hard to improve across exmouth and exeter east , such as social care provisions , post-16 education schemes , job opportunities , transport links , and support for farmers and those in rural affairs . it is worth voicing that this new parliament brings the winds of political change to devon and the wider south - west of england . as a new mp , i am open and willing to work with fellow south - west mps , regardless of political affinity , to ensure we drive as much investment and opportunity as possible to our part of the world , in a joined - up way . in an increasingly connected world , i believe our mps must have a firm understanding of the national and international issues that affect us , and most importantly how these issues affect our constituencies . for much of my adult life , i have fought hard in several organisations to keep our united kingdom safe and prosperous , both in the physical and the digital environment . we are on the precipice of a new industrial revolution . frontier technologies , such as artificial intelligence , supercomputing and nanobiotechnology , will radically change our world and the relationship we have with it . it is imperative that the new government understand these issues and work across the public and private sector to ensure that our united kingdom remains a technological global leader . there is no getting away from the fact that the international system is becoming more volatile . it is deeply sad that conversations about international conflict are no longer hypothetical . war has broken out across multiple global regions , and we must act without delay to increase defence spending to meet the threats that are clearly present . anthropogenic climate change has long ceased to be purely an academic debate — it is visible and happening now . we must continue to work closely with international partners to reduce our overall global carbon emissions . it is beyond a faux pas to speak in communist tones from the conservative benches — i could risk making the same treasonous mistake as sir walter raleigh . however , there is modern resonance in lenin ’s purported quote : “ there are decades where nothing happens ; and there are weeks where decades happen . ” in isolation , any of the points i have raised have the ability to cause mass societal and environmental change . when decades happening in weeks become the new normal , we must keep pace to ensure the united kingdom remains strong , allied and ahead of the pack in an ever - changing world . my final message is to the people of exmouth and exeter east who sent me to this house . i promise that i will always fight for us , and that i will represent us to the best of my ability , while i have the privilege of serving as their member of parliament . i congratulate i will begin by thanking my predecessor as member of parliament for mid derbyshire , pauline latham , for all she did to serve its residents . pauline represented the constituency from its creation in 2010 until she stood down at the end of the last parliament . prior to 2010 , the communities that make up the constituency were part of other constituencies , served by many illustrious former members , perhaps most notably george brown . pauline championed many important causes in this place , including international development . she also led the charge to increase the marriage age from 16 to 18 , a lasting change that reduces the risk of young people being subjected to coercion or abuse . i send pauline my every best wish for her next chapter , and i look forward to working with her on areas of shared concern . a small but important part of my constituency was served by the former member for derbyshire dales , sarah dines . i thank her for her service and i am sure my hon . friend one of the most exciting priorities of this new mission - led government is their commitment to harnessing the power of nature to deliver clean power and , in turn , to deliver energy security , new jobs and cheaper bills . there is a history , stretching back over 250 years , of using nature to power the economy in the derwent valley , which runs through mid derbyshire . the world ’s first water - powered mills were built on its river banks to spin cotton , making the valley the birthplace of the industrial revolution . among its early pioneers was jedediah strutt , a hosier and cotton spinner from belper . through an entrepreneurial approach , strutt progressed from humble beginnings to become one of the leading industrialists of his age . along with sir richard arkwright and samuel need , he was a father of the modern factory system , which was adopted around the world . although the derwent valley no longer hums to the clatter of looms or the rhythm of the people who operated them , it continues to harness nature to sustainably power homes and businesses through the hydroelectric schemes it supports today . however , despite being the east midlands ’ only unesco world heritage site , home to some of the country ’s most beautiful landscape and extensive biodiversity , some of the valley ’s iconic industrial buildings face an uncertain future , due to their poor state of repair and lack of occupation . we must save these buildings . they have incredible potential , including to support local economies , increase job opportunities and alleviate the housing crisis . they are also vital to telling derbyshire ’s story , and the story of our country . celebrating and preserving the past is not frivolous or sentimental nostalgia . it is vital to our sense of place and our perception of who we are today , what we share with others and what makes us distinctive . knowing where we have come from also shapes where we venture next ; that is as true of buildings , countryside and historic sites as it is of our politics . it is also true of our arts and culture . the creative industries are among britain ’s most important exports . they are a huge part of our economy and boost our standing around the world . they are a vital catalyst to express and explore ideas and bring communities together . they have been common to every culture since primordial times . music , the visual arts , dance and drama provide an opportunity to walk in somebody else ’s shoes . they build a more inquiring society and help us to understand who we are and what it might be like to have somebody else ’s experience . they are also a vital educational tool , but in far too many cases they are not a staple in schools or something that people have an adequate opportunity to engage with throughout their life . i look forward to making the case , throughout my time in this place , that this is an underused opportunity for our country . as we face the huge challenges ahead and return the country to economic stability and renewal , opportunity must be our watchword : opportunity to help people get ahead in life through good jobs , for example in the small and medium - sized businesses that proliferate in my constituency or at places like smartparc in spondon , where food production is being reimagined ; opportunity to benefit from exceptional education and training , such as is being offered at rolls - royce and at the university of derby in my constituency ; opportunity to enjoy good health and community safety through renewed public services ; and opportunity to live in a greener world through the new government ’s commitment to the environment and to tackling climate change . being given the opportunity to serve the people of mid derbyshire is the privilege of my life , and i thank everyone who supported me along the way . i thank the voters of mid derbyshire : whether they voted for me or not , i am here to serve them . i also thank my many friends and family , who have been a great source of strength on the journey . i am determined to do the people of mid derbyshire proud , and to support the new government to deliver the change that my constituents tell me they need and that they rightly deserve . thank you , madam deputy speaker . may i thank hon . members who have made their first speeches today for setting the bar so high ? i hope i can live up to the standard that they have set . i am sent to this place by the constituents of lichfield , a constituency that includes not only the city itself , but the town of burntwood and around 40 villages and hamlets in the great county of staffordshire . i am proud to serve the area that has been my home since before i knew to call anywhere home and where i hope it will be for many , many more years to come . my predecessor in this house was sir michael fabricant . he was knighted in 2023 for political and public service after more than 30 years representing first the constituency of mid staffordshire and then lichfield in this house . thirty - two years in total sir michael served , and i think that would be a number to which we would all aspire . should i be fortunate enough to still be in this place in 30 years ’ time , madame deputy speaker , i can only hope to have such a head of hair . it is , however , to longevity that i wish to turn now . although i have received advice from some colleagues not to mention the domesday book , i can neatly sidestep that as the recorded history of my constituency dates back some 1,000 years before william the conqueror to the roman invasion and the establishment of letocetum , a roman fort and later settlement near the crossroads of watling street and rykneld street in my constituency . the crossing of those two roads remained an important place throughout the roman and saxon periods , and , in the 7th century , chad of mercia established a cathedral and diocese in lichfield , which still exists today . in just over a week ’s time , i will be proud to be in attendance at the installation of — i think — the 58th dean of lichfield cathedral . the right reverend jan macfarlane will be the first woman to hold that post and will not only smash a glass ceiling , but be an excellent advocate for the cathedral and the church in the local community and beyond . the 7th century is also noteworthy for the burying of the staffordshire hoard , which was uncovered in hammerwich in my constituency in 2009 , near that same crossroads of watling street and rykneld street . the largest collection of anglo - saxon gold ever found , the hoard is already having , and will continue to have , a significant impact on our understanding of the people of these isles , before there was an england , a scotland , a wales or a northern ireland . let me move on from the 7th century . over the coming years , the city would continue to flourish and establish itself as a religious and ecumenical centre , although much of the surrounding area maintained its rural and agrarian aspect for many centuries to come . in this time , the area did produce innumerable great lives , and , while they are far too numerous to mention all of them here , i should note gregory king , the world ’s first economic statistician ; elias ashmole , whose collections founded the ashmolean museum , the first of its type in the uk ; david garrick , the noted theatre innovator and manager ; the physician erasmus darwin , a founding member of the lunar society who had a rather famous grandson ; the poet , anna seward ; thomas gisborne of yoxall lodge , an abolitionist and a close associate of william wilberforce ; the painter john louis petit , who is having a wonderful renaissance in the understanding of his work ; frederick oakeley , who translated the words to “ o come all ye faithful ” in lichfield cathedral ; and , of course , samuel johnson , a man of letters and the author of the first dictionary of the english language . johnson ’s heir , samuel barber , was a freed slave who would go on to run a school in burntwood , decades before tom jenkins would begin teaching in teviothead in scotland , and who would also serve as a dozener in local government in lichfield and almost certainly become the first black man to serve in local government in the uk . before i move on from some famous people from around the area , i should mention a local success story in sophie capewell . lichfield ’s golden girl brought home not just a gold medal from paris this year , but a world record as part of team gbs fantastic efforts . in doing so , she ended my reign as the most successful former pupil of my old school , nether stowe in lichfield , and although i had hoped to hold that title a little longer than 32 days i am happy to be disappointed on that point . returning to my historical tour of lichfield and its surrounding area , we reach the early and mid-19th century , and the town of burntwood , a conurbation of mining villages , which grew up some four miles from lichfield and has a similarly proud history . its most notable resident was the fundraiser and campaigner stephen sutton , who raised millions for the teenage cancer trust despite his diagnosis . we lost him far too soon , at the age of just 19 . he was made an mbe for his fundraising , so it is more than fitting that burntwood town council remembers him through a student award named in his honour . not to be outshone by the cathedral down the road , burntwood also took its place in ecclesiastical history when , in 1883 , st anne ’s church in chasetown became the first in the country to have electric lighting . today , the people of burntwood still maintain a close - knit community , typical of former mining areas . that is shown by the great examples of the spark café and burntwood be a friend , which have done so much to step in to replace services cut during 14 long years of conservative government . if we are discussing burntwood , we can not forget the giant - killing exploits of chasetown fc in the fa cup of 2007 - 08 . at some point , i will forgive the members for cardiff . burntwood is not the only part of my constituency that has a mining history . the village of handsacre also more than played its part in powering the industry of the 19th and 20th centuries . it is also the village where my old man taught his first lessons as a probationary teacher in the 1970s . the suggestion that his geordie accident was in part responsible for his hiring in a school built to teach the children of new arrivals from the north - east remains suspected , if unconfirmed . mining was not the only industry that found its way to my part of staffordshire . many of us will recognise the name armitage shanks , but few will know its links to the village of armitage , just a short trip up rugeley road from handsacre . as the new government focus their legislative agenda on growth , i remind colleagues that while many of us may have already spent a penny with armitage shanks , they are all welcome to visit and spend many more in the coming years . all this industry meant that the canals came to my constituency . the coventry canal and the trent and mersey canal are still navigable today , and the work of the lichfield and hatherton canal restoration trust should be commended , as it aims to restore that link as a green and blue way over the coming years . having touched again on transport , i will complete the circle and return to the crossroads that made letocetum . watling street , or the a5 , as it is now known , and rykneld street , the a38 , are major transport arteries that link my constituency together , and link it easily to the rest of the country . the a38 in particular has helped to establish a logistics centre in the village of fradley on the site of the former raf lichfield . fans of the bbc ’s “ bargain hunt ” will know fradley well , given the regular appearances of richard winterton and his auctioneers on that show . i hope that i can get as much airtime as they do . slightly further up the a38 is the national memorial arboretum near alrewas — a wonderful venue , as the site of national remembrance . i advise every single person to make a visit there to remember , not just in november but on any day . i am sure that in the coming months the secretary of state for transport will grow tired of my lobbying about the need for a railway station to serve that amazing location . on a dissimilar note , the first travelodge in the uk was opened slightly up the road some 39 years ago , near the village of barton - under - needwood , although that village should be much better remembered as the home of the holland tug of war team . founded in 1970 , the team has represented england at numerous international tournaments , and even brought home a silver medal from the 2010 world open championships . it is to this constituency that i will return during the recess . i look forward to speaking to my constituents about transport , access to healthcare , education , health and care plans , and many other issues that are on their lips . i look forward to bringing those stories back to this place , so that i can continue to advocate on my constituents ’ behalf . i am extremely honoured to be giving my maiden speech in a debate named after the late , great sir david amess . i am grateful for this opportunity . i thank all members who have given their maiden speeches today . i enjoyed the lot of them . it has been wonderful to learn about the many famous former residents of lichfield , and i wish i am the first non - conservative mp for west dorset in its 139 - year history — something i am extremely proud of . that notwithstanding , i will start by paying tribute to my conservative predecessor . chris loder ’s family has farmed west dorset for over 100 years , and he should be deservedly proud to have served as its mp . we are both successors to sir oliver letwin , an mp who was so well respected by the residents of west dorset that they would stop me at every opportunity to tell me what a fantastic constituency mp he was . i can only hope to leave this house as fondly remembered in the area as he is . although each of us has been proud to be the member for west dorset , we are not west dorset ’s proudest member . that honour goes to the cerne abbas giant , a 55 - metre - high chalk fertility symbol whose presence stands proud over the cerne valley for all to see . west dorset is the best constituency in the country . i know that for a fact because the towns of bridport , dorchester , lyme regis and sherborne have , at various times over the past few years , been described as the best towns in britain by no less an authority than the dorset echo , a newspaper that shares my unrivalled objectivity when it comes to the virtues of west dorset . west dorset is home to the world - famous jurassic coast , a unesco world heritage site , where mary anning helped to revolutionise our understanding of prehistoric life . she was long overlooked by historians , but her contribution is now recognised with a beautiful statue in her home town of lyme regis . at the other end of chesil beach is the fleet lagoon , the uk ’s largest saltwater lagoon , on which sits the abbotsbury swannery , which is home to over 600 swans and is a fantastic day out , especially if you love swans . as well as the swans , one can also see , rather incongruously , a prototype of barnes wallis ’s bouncing bomb . quite what the swans of abbotsbury thought about their home being used as a replica for the ruhr dams is still unknown . sadly , our beaches and rivers saw over 45,000 hours of sewage released into them last year . the river lim , which exits at lyme regis , was declared “ ecologically dead ” due to the levels of pollution in it . it is shameful that i and my family , before we go swimming at the nearby beach of west bay , must log on to the surfers against sewage app to check whether it is safe to swim . i committed during the campaign to using my seat in this house to pressure the government to take serious action on the issue of sewage , and i promise to do so . west dorset is hardy country . thomas hardy is renowned the world over for his poetry and novels , such as “ far from the madding crowd ” and “ tess of the d’urbervilles . ” his works famously deal with themes of melancholy , sadness and moral conflict — emotions that i am sure are familiar to members voting in the tory leadership contest . in his lifetime , he was also highly critical of the declining status afforded to rural britain . for even more than its beautiful towns and coastline , west dorset is a constituency defined by its countryside — a landscape managed and maintained by our farmers and food producers , who are the beating heart of our rural economy . we desperately need a national food and farming strategy that will deliver sustainable living for our farmers . far from being cut , the farming budget must be significantly increased if conversations about food security are ever to be anything other than fine words . as an environmentalist , i am delighted that we now have a government who seem to understand the importance of tackling the climate crisis and who recognise the vital part that renewable energy will play in achieving net zero . having spent a large part of my career in renewable energy , i will be urging the government to go further and faster if we are to avoid the worst ravages of the climate emergency , which is already unfolding . the liberal democrats will continue to champion the need for action in this house . on the subject of my party , i pay tribute to our party leader , my right hon . friend i knew then that it was not enough to stand on the sidelines and watch the country that i love so much be eaten by the self - interest of those who seek power only for power ’s sake or for self - enrichment . sadly , over the summer we saw that there are those who would seek to use the misery of people who have come here seeking refuge to further their own aims . i mention that because it will come as no surprise that the morellos are not originally from this island . the morellos of italy became the morellos of spain — with apologies to both countries for my pronunciation — before coming to britain at the beginning of the 20th century . one of my forebears died fighting in world war one for the country that adopted him , and is buried in a commonwealth war grave cemetery in northern france . my own father served in the royal navy . even more than morellos , my family are mazierskis . my maternal grandfather came here from poland at the end of the second world war , fleeing another type of political tyranny . he arrived as a child , speaking no english . he became an engineer and set up a building company . his children became nurses , teachers , artists and architects . his grandchildren are doctors , civil servants , lecturers and environmentalists , and one of them stands here today as a member of parliament . in my experience , immigrants do not forget the debt they owe the country that offered them a future . we must not let hate win . we must champion hope . that is why it is more important than ever to fly the flag for liberalism , liberal values and a rules - based international order . i would also like to mention my amazing wife . she is far , far cleverer than me and would make a far better politician . without her , i certainly would not be here today , not just because of the love and support she has shown me , but because it was her suggestion that i run in the first place — something i find myself reminding her with increasing frequency . finally , i thank the voters of west dorset for putting their faith in me . it is a huge honour to represent them , and i look forward to doing everything i can to deliver a better deal for west dorset . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for allowing me to make my maiden contribution in this debate . i pay tribute to the members on both sides of the house who have made their maiden contributions , including i am extremely proud to be the first labour member of parliament for altrincham and sale west , in no small part because of the brilliant team of local volunteers who worked on the campaign and the support of my wonderful friends and family . i also thank my constituency neighbour , my hon . friend at this early stage in my contribution , i want to pay tribute to my predecessor , lord brady , who represented the people of altrincham and sale west for 27 years . i thank him for his service to his constituents and for his kind words to me following my election . i think one of my constituents summed it up best . while i was knocking on doors in hale during the election campaign , a woman — and the whole house will be relieved to know that i will not attempt to impersonate her — said of lord brady , “ the thing about graham is that whether you agreed or disagreed with him , and frankly i usually disagreed with him , he was always unfailingly affable . ” i hope to one day be described by my constituents in a similar fashion . of course , as the result of a rather interesting few years for the conservative party , he might well come to be remembered as one as the more consequential chairs of the 1922 committee . i am sure the new chair , when i meet new members from all sides of this house and tell them i am fortunate enough to represent a constituency as beautiful as altrincham and sale west , in many cases i get a nagging sense from them that my mere presence in this house , representing where i do , is symptomatic not just of the level of change at the last general election , but of a labour party that is able to appeal to every part of our country and every section of society . however , the reality is that my constituency is extraordinarily diverse in almost every regard . within easy reach of the city of manchester , it is a place of business , thriving small and medium - sized enterprises and entrepreneurship — including the spectacular market in altrincham — but wythenshawe and trafford general hospitals are also major employers . it is an area with tens of churches , four synagogues and the altrincham and hale muslim association , and it is where many from hong kong have chosen to start a new life away from tyranny and repression . yes , it is a part of the world where many people are doing well for themselves and for their families , but it also has an estimated 3,000 children growing up in poverty . what unites the constituency and makes it such an extraordinary place is that it has such a strong sense of community , participation , and everyone pitching in to play their part . i have seen that at altrincham football club , a brilliant community club with amazing grassroots initiatives , and which in 2019 became the first team in england to wear a shirt inspired by the rainbow flag to show their support in the fight against homophobia . i have seen it from staff and volunteers at the garrick playhouse , who work tirelessly to put on a comprehensive series of plays and productions , and i have seen it at trafford south foodbank , which works across the constituency to provide for people in need . it is able to do what it does thanks to the remarkably generous donations of local people . however , all too often , organisations such as that foodbank are having to go above and beyond in the most challenging of circumstances to stop people falling through the cracks , because as a country we have failed to provide people with the security in work that they need ; we have failed to provide the economic stability and certainty that businesses need in order to invest ; and we have failed to address the long - term challenges our country faces . that is why labour was elected : to fix what has become broken , and to offer hope and renewal . that is why the people of altrincham and sale west sent me here : to cut waiting times across our national health service , including at wythenshawe and trafford general ; to clean up our badly polluted rivers and streams ; and to make sure people can feel safe on our streets by tackling crime and antisocial behaviour . having worked on a national campaign against the violence and abuse that shopworkers receive , i know how important it is that we clamp down on crime against public - facing workers , and i know that this government will act . having changed our party so that we could be given the extraordinary opportunity we have to change our country , that is the sort of tangible change to the lives of people in altrincham and sale west that we must achieve . i am looking forward to working to deliver that change in the years to come and showing how , even in difficult times , government can still be a force for good . that is the very least that the people of altrincham and sale west , and of our country , expect and deserve . on that note , second only to bridgend , chatham and aylesford is one of the most beautiful constituencies in the country . [ laughter . ] created in 1997 from the previous rochester and chatham , mid kent , and tonbridge and malling seats , we have a rich legacy of excellent and outspoken parliamentarians , including dame peggy fenner , andrew rowe , julian critchley , jonathan shaw and the remarkable dame tracey crouch . what can i say ? dame tracey is well known for her warm personality and diligence . she is engaging , and her constituents spoke well of her on the doorstep and in the 14 years she represented the area . i am also reliably informed that , unlike me , she had a legendary involvement in the parliamentary football team . i am reliably informed , again , that her tackling skills were well known , and that no one ever tried to take the ball from her when she was in in full flight . on a serious note , she has done outstanding work on the football fan - led review , she led on anti - gambling legislation when she was in the department for culture , media and sport , and she has left a deeply inspiring legacy for young women in sport in particular . i salute her record and her fortitude . my constituents embody aspiration and determination . although i was raised in the city of medway , i have been actively involved in chatham since 2001 . it is a dynamic and diverse area , with hard - working , direct and down - to - earth people . the constituency is truly beautiful , with stunning panoramic views from blue bell hill over the weald of kent . on a clear day one can see many other constituencies , including tonbridge , sevenoaks , maidstone and malling and canterbury , and many walkers and hikers find entertainment along the historic pilgrims ’ way . the seat also contains some of the earliest human settlement history , with the megalithic structures of kit ’s coty harking back to neolithic times . it is identified with numerous artefacts of historical significance , although i must say to the part of my constituency that will be most familiar to members is chatham , whose historic legacy is known across the world . its significance as a commissioned dockyard has been recognised globally , and its long - standing naval tradition dates back to henry viii and the tudor period . the area retained that naval link until the 1980s , when the dockyard was closed , and it still has that proud naval tradition . i am reliably informed that the resolute desk in the oval office , in the heart of western democracy , came from hms resolute , which was constructed and supported in chatham , and many of our finest naval traditions have come from that location . chatham and aylesford does , however , face significant challenges . many areas , particularly urban chatham , experience poverty , and , according to figures from the house of commons library , 17 % of children are living in poverty . issues such as crime and antisocial behaviour have been exacerbated by cuts in neighbourhood policing and early intervention programmes . i am committed to working with all our communities to address those challenges . , and it is on that note that i want to pay particular tribute to many of the charities and other organisations that serve my local community . they include the arches project in luton , the dementia awareness groups , street angels , royal british legion industries and our poppy appeal volunteers , who go out every year to collect funds for veterans and our military community . i believe that community wealth building should be central to our approach to government . by focusing on wealth creation , we can drive and support local businesses and revitalise our town centres . my hon . friend in recent weeks i have heard many inspiring speeches from new members , but what unites us all is a shared ambition to effect positive change for our communities and our country . i am honoured to serve , and i pledge to work across party lines to ensure economic security and improvements in our public services — and i will do so in a friendly , open and approachable way . the government must of course deal with the £ 22 billion in - year deficit , and we must work to secure our economic prosperity to ensure that all our people , especially our young people , have the skills that will give them a future . i am deeply honoured to represent the constituents of chatham and aylesford . thank you for calling me to make my maiden speech , madam deputy speaker . i congratulate it is with immense pride and honour that i stand here today to give my maiden speech as the first ever female and first ever liberal democrat member of parliament for epsom and ewell , which also includes the towns of ashtead and leatherhead . this moment is not just about my election victory , but part of a long journey of progress that started with brave women like emily wilding davison , a suffragette who gave her life for the cause of women ’s rights . in 1911 , she famously hid within the walls of this very building , the palace of westminster , to declare it her residence on the night of the census . just two years later , she made the ultimate sacrifice , losing her life at the epsom derby while campaigning for women ’s suffrage . it is remarkable that today , 101 years after her passing , we now have 263 women in this parliament , more than ever before . that progress is a testament to her legacy and the relentless efforts of organisations such as 50:50 parliament , whose support in getting me here i am personally grateful for . i am delighted that there is now progress towards establishing a women ’s caucus in parliament . i want to take this opportunity to congratulate lord grayling , my predecessor , on his move to the other place , and to thank him for his 23 years of dedicated service to epsom and ewell . his service to the community is well recognised , and i look forward to building upon that work , while bringing fresh perspectives and new energy to our local and national challenges . the community of epsom and ewell prides itself on strong local values , resilience , and on a rich sporting and creative history . it is home to the world - famous epsom derby . we have the university for the creative arts , laine theatre arts and many sporting clubs , including three running clubs and two football clubs . it has several vibrant economic hubs , with many successful businesses , large and small . but it is the people who make my constituency special . whether it is our small businesses , voluntary groups or the diverse families who have made the area their home , epsom and ewell represents the best of what a community can be when it works together . epsom and ewell is a beautiful place , blessed with remarkable green spaces and historical significance . we are fortunate to have three sites of special scientific interest : ashtead common , priest hill and stones road pond . we also have beautiful green spaces , such as horton and nonsuch parks , epsom downs and the surrey hills , an area of outstanding natural beauty . one site that holds special meaning for many is langley vale , which was used to train over 8,000 soldiers during the first world war and where lord kitchener famously inspected the troops . today , it stands as a centenary wood , a place of reflection with beautiful sculptures honouring our military past . as someone who proudly served in the army , in the royal military police , i am deeply moved by our community ’s ties to the armed forces . my own military experience includes serving in iraq during operation telic iv in 2004 , where i was responsible for retraining and mentoring the iraqi police force in maysan province . it was a volatile and dangerous region at that time and it was not an easy tour . we came under fire on a regular basis and it was made harder with the knowledge that , just a year before my arrival , six of my rmp colleagues were killed in majar al - kabir . the coroner found that they had been given inadequate radios and ammunition , so it was no surprise that we were given more ammo and weapons when i arrived . i want to ensure that our armed forces continue to have the right resources to stay safe in their duties as this government conduct their spending review . i hope the secretary of state for defence will bear in mind the effect that cuts can have in the field . lord darzi ’s report about the nhs was published today , so it is apt that i share a personal experience that underscores my commitment to improving healthcare services in epsom and ewell . in 2007 , my six - week - old son suddenly turned blue in front of me , while a health visitor was visiting . i called 999 . it was a terrifying moment , and before i knew what was going on , my living room was packed with paramedics and there was equipment everywhere . i was told to pack a bag and shortly afterwards we arrived at a&e. the crash team was there and my baby boy was surrounded by 20 consultants trying to figure out what was wrong . i stood there looking on , helpless . the doctors managed to stabilise my son and moved him to the amazing evelina hospital , just over the river from parliament , as they did not have the specialist equipment needed . he went into the paediatric intensive care unit . every bit of his skin , even his head , was covered by some sort of patch or monitor to try to establish what was going on . the consultant informed us that he had bronchiolitis and that it would be touch and go that evening . thankfully , my son survived the night and we spent over a week in intensive care , as the amazing doctors worked to save his life from bronchiolitis . i saw at first hand the critical importance of high - quality emergency care . it is my mission to make sure that the residents of epsom , ewell , ashtead and leatherhead have access to the best possible healthcare . our community was promised one of the 40 new hospitals . that commitment must be fulfilled . we are part of the epsom and st helier university hospitals nhs trust . st helier hospital is struggling , with crumbling facilities and overstretched staff . we have fewer hospital beds per capita than in many other nations . ceilings are falling in and buildings are condemned . the need for a new hospital is urgent , and i look forward to discussing it with the secretary of state for health and social care in the coming weeks . the house will be pleased to know that my son is now a big , strong 16 - year - old , challenging his parents as every teenager does . epsom and ewell is home to two significant rivers : the hogsmill , a relatively pristine chalk river whose beauty was immortalised by sir john everett millais in his iconic painting “ ophelia ” ; and the river mole , which is one of the most polluted in the country . thames water ’s negligent handling of our water resources has led to more than 8,000 hours of sewage discharge into the river mole in the first six months of this year alone . thames water is crippled by being billions in debt , and water bills keep rising . executive bonuses are handed out as the sewage is pouring out . this mismanagement of our water is unacceptable . i call for greater regulation and accountability and for a sewage tax to protect our rivers and water infrastructure . epsom and ewell has affluent areas , but we also face stark social inequalities . there are parts of my constituency in which food banks have become a lifeline for struggling families , and our local housing waiting list has grown to more than 1,300 households . food banks are not the norm ; they are a sign that society simply is not working . i am concerned that even more of my constituents will be using them this winter as they struggle without the winter fuel allowance . the stark contrast between wealth and deprivation is a reminder that we must do more to support those who are most in need . i am incredibly grateful for the work of the good company , the leatherhead community hub , local faith organisations and all the volunteers and local charities who work tirelessly to provide for our community ’s most vulnerable . as the member of parliament for epsom and ewell — a constituency that stretches from worcester park and stoneleigh in the north to ashtead and leatherhead , the gateway of the surrey hills , in the south — i want our community to thrive economically , socially and environmentally . my constituency has inspired literary greats such as c. s. lewis and jane austen . i believe that it can continue to be a place of innovation and inspiration . i thank my parents for their support throughout the years . i thank my husband and three kids for their support and their leafleting prowess throughout my campaign . most importantly , i thank my constituents for placing their trust in me . i am committed to repaying their trust with service , dedication and determination to make epsom and ewell a better place for everyone . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for calling me to address the house for my first speech , and for making time available for so many of us to make our first speech today . i particularly congratulate in passing , i must mention lord darzi ’s report , which my right hon . friend the health secretary presented to the house today — not because of the content of the report , but because in 2015 i was honoured to become a darzi fellow . lord darzi set up his fellowship programme to bring clinicians like me , a nurse , into clinical leadership , to ensure that the nhs and the health system are led by clinicians . i am not sure that the plan was to get us all into the houses of parliament , but i am the first darzi fellow here and i think there will be quite a few more . i am honoured to speak in this debate in memory of sir david amess , whose constituency of southend west can be seen from mine of sittingbourne and sheppey — we see the beautiful vista of southend , which is now a city , across the thames . over the past few months , during the campaign and afterwards , there have been several times when i have looked over at southend and taken a moment to reflect on the manner and the tragedy of sir david ’s death and what it means for all of us serving here in the house . it is a great blessing of my constituency that , amid our busy , traffic - laden towns , we have these beautiful vistas down the thames and the medway estuary . we have broad , flat salt marshes meeting big skies — places that you can escape to and properly reflect on everything that matters in life . during the election campaign , i asked my constituents what they valued most in the constituency , and it was that proximity to nature that kept coming up . they mentioned the wide - open estuary waters of the thames and medway — several of my medway colleagues are in their places today — the many sites of special scientific interest and the nature reserve at elmley . now that members are spending time in london , they might want to pop down for a hot yoga weekend — it ’s a whole thing . however — so many members have said something similar when describing their seat — that is only half the story . the other half is the still proudly industrial town of sittingbourne . its character and location challenge many people ’s preconceptions of kent . sittingbourne ’s twin on the isle of sheppey , sheerness - on - sea , has busy docks — docks that , hopefully , will become only busier as the opportunities for growth , construction and new green industries are realised by this government . sittingbourne and sheppey is perfectly located to take advantage of all that development . my job is not only to argue for our place in the rebuilding of britain , but to ensure that my constituents see real social , economic , health and wellbeing benefits from the opportunities . the factors that led to the foundations of our towns being laid centuries ago fit the way that technological , industrial and transport strategies are all pointing now . sittingbourne straddles the main road from dover to london and is connected directly by water , road and rail to sheerness docks on sheppey . this is what made the saxon kings of kent grab the land and claim it as their terra regis . this is something that the residents of milton regis are very proud to remind me of — that it is a royal town in the middle of sittingbourne . it was those same routes that allowed the town of queenborough to develop as a major port . tucked behind sheppey is the safe waterway — and major trading route — from london through to the continent and the rest of the world . those routes are also what enabled sittingbourne to develop a major brick - building industry in the 19th century . it produced more bricks and had more people working in it than the potteries in staffordshire . those bricks were largely used to build london . many town houses in the 19th century , buckingham palace and many of the buildings on this parliamentary estate will have been built with the clay and bricks from sittingbourne . our water and transport gives us the opportunity to produce green energy and bring about greener ways of travelling . that will benefit sittingbourne and sheerness in the future . peel ports at sheerness is a major importer of construction materials for the south of england . with investment to restore our rail freight links and an ambition to once again use our water routes , we can be at the heart of a green revolution . but there is more to a place than land and water . a place is made by people . what will ensure that the people of my constituency get the benefits that they are crying out for as a result of growth and rebuilding is the strength of our local communities and the collective action that comes from grassroots organisations . as we move more services out of hospitals to the community and try to mend the broken sense of cohesion in our society , these community actors will be key . there are great organisations , including seashells nursery in sheerness , which holds true to the course taken by sure start centres , with their now proven benefits , although they are sadly under threat of closure , and wiggles children ’s nursery , which has partnered with sheppey ’s range rovers football club to create a multi - generational facility that will massively boost the health of the neighbourhood . there are also people coming together , on the island and the mainland , to form progressive men ’s mental health peer support groups , including men - talk . uk in sheppey and sittingbourne . a team of volunteers resurrected the sittingbourne carnival this year after several years ’ gap to ensure that its tradition of more than 130 years does not die , but instead will go from strength to strength . there is swale food bank , and underpinning so many of the voluntary organisations in my constituency is swale community and voluntary services , which fosters lots of organisations , helping them to get started , get organising and help their communities . part of the reason for that depth of community co - operation is that my constituency faces the challenge of having some of the most deprived parts of kent and the south - east . unfortunately , a big driver for that is the very geography that otherwise brings in so many benefits and opportunities . as sheppey is an island , with only one point in the west that connects to the rest of england , there are pockets of isolation , and when the two bridges go down , as sadly they have all too often of late , people can not get off sheppey to go to work or school , or on to sheppey to deliver services in sheppey ’s hospitals , schools , docks and three prisons . all that impacts not just sheppey but sittingbourne and the surrounding villages . both my predecessors worked to overcome those entrenched challenges . i pay tribute to my immediate predecessor , gordon henderson , who many here know well , for his work persuading his party when they were in power to invest in technical skills training on the island and expand sheppey college . my labour predecessor , derek wyatt , secured the funding for a permanent fixed bridge to the island , the sheppey crossing , to overcome the problems of the old kingsferry bridge , which is only a few metres away and has to be raised several times a day to let ships through , to link the paper mills and the docks . both of them believed in the enormous potential of the area , but there is a lot more to do . it is a professional habit of intensive care nurses that we are inveterate fiddlers and fixers . we like to help people , and we like to keep busy doing so . now that i have swapped adjusting ventilator settings and syringe drivers for work in public policy , however , i need to find new ways to keep busy . i will keep working with people in sittingbourne and sheppey to bring them together , and will work collaboratively at trying to fix things for the better , but there is one thing in the constituency that i assure you , madam deputy speaker , i will not be fiddling with : the ss richard montgomery , a wrecked world war two cargo ship sunk just off sheerness , which is packed with something like 1,400 tonnes of high explosives . most experts feel that as long as the ship is not disturbed , the seawater will gradually inactivate those explosives , so if they are ever disturbed enough to trigger , any fireworks would be minor . however , there is a minority view that if something triggered all the explosives to go off at once , the resulting explosion would not just inundate the whole of sittingbourne and sheppey but send a 5 - metre tsunami back up the thames , all the way to central london , swamping the palace of westminster — giving us all very wet feet , and most of the mps in the south - east and london an awful lot of extra casework . finally , i thank my constituents again for putting their faith in me ; the campaigners and activists who helped me to get elected ; my parents and siblings , who have always shown how proud they are of me ; and most of all , my husband lee , who i could not have got this far in life without , and who is a true partner to me in everything that we do . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to make my maiden speech . i thank all hon . members for their fine contributions , including my hon . friend it is the greatest honour of my life to serve the people of stratford - on - avon . i am humbled to have been elected to represent the place that i call home , where i live and where i have raised my family , who are here today in the public gallery . i am proud to be the first liberal mp for our constituency in over a century , and the first woman ever to be elected to this role . i extend my heartfelt thanks to the people of stratford , alcester , studley , shipston , henley , bidford and the many villages and hamlets that make up our beautiful constituency . i thank them for placing their trust in me . i promise to be their champion , and a strong and unwavering voice for everyone , fighting every day for the fair deal that they deserve . i pay tribute to my predecessor , nadhim zahawi , who was mp for stratford - on - avon for the last 14 years . during his political career he covered many important roles in the cabinet , but i thank him in particular for his work as vaccines minister during the covid pandemic . i also acknowledge the service of the late john maples , who represented stratford - upon - avon with distinction from 1997 to 2010 , before being elevated to the other place . he was both well liked and greatly admired . although i am proud to be the first female mp for stratford - upon - avon , i am not the first to bring italian heritage to the role . that distinction belongs to another of my predecessors , john profumo , who beat me to it — although i plan on a much quieter stay in the history books . my constituency is one of the most beautiful areas of our country , with luscious woodland such as the heart of england forest , valleys lapped by rivers and brooks , and fertile farmland — a landscape special as only the warwickshire countryside can be . my connection to my constituency is one of deep love . i love the stretches from shipston - on - stour and the rolling cotswolds fringes in the south , to the avon valley villages and henley - in - arden in the north , where the majestic forest of arden once stood . at the heart of my constituency lies the town of stratford - upon - avon , celebrated worldwide as the birthplace of the greatest playwright of all : william shakespeare . each year on william ’s birthday , the town remembers and celebrates its most famous son , with civic dignitaries and local schoolchildren parading through the historic streets to lay flowers on his tomb in holy trinity church . i look forward to joining them next april . what makes our constituency special above all is its people , who are resilient and community minded . each town and village is blessed with warm - hearted volunteers helping in repair cafés , food banks , the community speed watch and flood action groups . there are outstanding places of learning , such as our local schools and colleges , the shakespeare institute of the university of birmingham , and the university of warwick ’s innovation campus ; national portfolio organisations such as the royal shakespeare company and the shakespeare birthplace trust ; as well as grassroots arts companies such as the bear pit theatre and escape arts . events such as the shipston proms celebrate the wealth of musical talent . most of all , we are a constituency of entrepreneurs and innovators , businesses and social enterprises . overlooked by beaudesert castle — known locally as “ the mount”—the town of henley - in - arden has a timber - framed high street , which includes henley ’s most famous attraction , henley ice cream , which is well worth a visit . alcester is a town rich in community spirit that comes together each year for events such as the alcester food festival . the town ’s roots stretch back to roman times , and its heritage is proudly preserved today in the roman alcester museum . just up the road from alcester is coughton court , home of the throckmorton family , who played a rather infamous role in the gunpowder plot of 1605 . as the new mp for the area , i assure the house that i will not continue that local tradition . my constituency also has some of the most beautiful waterways in the country . the rivers avon , alne , arrow and stour , and our fantastic canal network , including the longest canal aqueduct in england — the edstone aqueduct — are not only vital to our community ’s natural and industrial heritage , but are central to our environmental responsibilities . sadly , not enough has been done to tackle river pollution . i thank residents for joining citizens ’ science projects to regularly test the water and collect much - needed data on the state of our rivers ’ health , so that we can hold the government and water companies to account . as a rural constituency , we face many challenges : nhs dentistry deserts , long waiting times for mental health services , special educational needs and disabilities families battling for education provision , and fuel poverty . many of my vulnerable constituents live in off - grid homes that are expensive to heat . the warm homes and energy conservation act 2000 , introduced by sir david amess , was important legislation that sought to eliminate fuel poverty . to further combat it , we need an emergency home insulation programme so that homes are safe , warm and cheap to heat . as shakespeare wrote : “ some are born great , some achieve greatness , and others have greatness thrust upon them . ” i stand here today not because i was born great , or because i sought greatness , but because the people of stratford - upon - avon have entrusted me with public service . together , we can achieve greatness not for ourselves , but for our constituents and our country . with a new parliament , we have a chance to strive for a fairer , greener and more inclusive future . the stage is set , and it is now time for us to play our part . before we proceed to business , i should like once again to thank the speaker ’s chaplain , the venerable patricia hillas , who , as i told the house in the summer , will be consecrated next month as bishop of sodor and man . that means that today is her final day saying prayers in this chamber and this is her final week in the house administration . during her tenure , tricia has been involved with some of the most challenging times to face this house : the impact of covid on the parliamentary community ; the murder of our much - loved colleague sir david amess ; the deaths of her late majesty queen elizabeth and the duke of edinburgh ; and , of course , the coronation of his majesty king charles iii . at every gathering , in all circumstances , tricia has had a calming presence , showing warmth and giving wise counsel to mps and staff alike . i personally will miss tricia , and all the support and help that she has given me in my position . i am sure that the whole house would like to take this opportunity once again to wish tricia well . the isle of man ’s gain is our loss . i do mean this , tricia : you will always be with us , and you will always be there for us . thank you . when members lost their seats and were troubled about it , as we were , you were there to give compassion and support . i know that you have met new members as well . thank you for everything that you have done and for the compassion that you have given the house . you will be missed , but i hope that you enjoy the isle of man . tricia ’s successor will be announced in due course . i also hope that the whole house will wish to join me in congratulating terry wiggins mbe , sous chef , who retires this week after an astonishing 50 years ’ service to the house . terry joined the house service in 1974 at the age of 16 , starting in the members ’ dining room and working his way up through various chef roles , culminating in running the debate in portcullis house . terry was also pivotal in the establishment of the commons and lords rugby team — wrong code!—which has raised significant sums for charities over the years . in 2005 , he was awarded an mbe for services to parliament . terry is a most talented , friendly and hard - working individual . i am sure that the whole house will join me in thanking him for his long and loyal service , and in wishing him and his wife christine a long and happy retirement . but if we are struggling , we will call on you , terry ! thank you for your service . i can now announce the results of the remaining select committee chair election . i congratulate patricia ferguson , who has been elected chair of the scottish affairs committee . a breakdown of the results of all of yesterday ’s elections will shortly be made available in the vote office . ordered , that the lords message [ that this house concurs with the lords in their resolution . — ( the chairman of ways and means . ) the secretary of state was asked — what steps he is taking to promote innovation in the agricultural sector . first , i add my congratulations to the speaker ’s chaplain on her distinguished tenure , and to terry wiggins , who has been here much longer than all of us . i thank the right hon . member for his question . the government recognise the importance of innovation in supporting farmers to boost britain ’s food security , drive productivity and improve nature ’s recovery . the uk has world - class science and innovation capabilities . the government will promote the uk as a great place for technology innovators , which will drive investment , economic growth and create high - skilled jobs , supporting farmers to embrace the latest technology and best practice . one of the challenges for risk - taking farmers is the regulatory environment . will the secretary of state update the house on how he will bring together natural england , the environment agency and other agencies to reflect and be much more responsive to the enterprise culture in farming ? i share the right hon . member ’s interest in the need for effective regulation . i will soon make an announcement about our intentions to review regulation to ensure that it is fit for purpose across the department and helps to achieve the priority objectives that we have set out as a new government and ministerial team . what steps his department is taking to increase uptake of environmental land management schemes . i echo the good wishes of my right hon . friend the secretary of state to your chaplain , mr speaker , and to terry , who have nourished us in mind , body and spirit . i congratulate the hon . lady on her election to the house . this labour government are fully committed to environmental land management schemes . we will optimise the schemes so that they produce the right outcomes for all farmers , including small , grassland , upland and tenant farmers who have been too often ignored , while delivering food security and nature recovery in a just and equitable way . on a visit to a local farm this summer with the national farmers union , it was raised with me that some farmers are not signing up for one of the government ’s sustainable farming initiatives , because they fear being locked in when a better deal may be just around the corner . if we want farmers to farm more sustainably , we need to ensure that they are getting the support they need to do so . with that in mind , will the minister clarify whether farmers who sign up for an sfi will be able to transition to an alternative one , and if not , whether the rules will be reviewed so that they can do so ? i believe a cow was very interested in the hon . lady ’s coat on one of her recent visits — i hope both the cow and the coat have recovered . we encourage all farmers to apply for the sustainable farm initiative , and we are actively looking at how we can achieve stability going forward . i call the chair of the environmental audit committee . it is a great pleasure to see my hon . and right hon . friends in their places on the front bench . the environmental land management scheme approach was a really innovative idea from the previous government , but its implementation has been a shambles and it is leaving far too many farmers desperately worried about their future . can my hon . friend tell me any more about what the government have inherited and the urgent steps that they will take to support britain ’s farmers to farm in a more natural way in the future ? i congratulate my hon . friend on his election to chair of the environmental audit committee — obviously the finest committee in parliament , of which i have very fond memories . he is right , and he will know that this labour government are addressing the £ 22 billion hole in the public finances . no decisions on the farming budget have been taken . spending on the department ’s priorities will be confirmed as part of the spending review , but we will not be overturning the apple cart and we are fully committed to environmental land management schemes . i call the chair of the environment , food and rural affairs committee . arguably , and in the view of some of us , ours is the finest select committee in the house . the problems with the uptake of elms have been at the heart of a significant departmental underspend . no fair - minded individual would blame the current government for that , but if that money disappears back into the treasury , never to be seen again on farms , that blame will be attached to the current government . in opposition , they said that any underspend should be rolled over into future years . is that still their position in government , and how will they do it ? i congratulate the right hon . gentleman on his election to the second best committee in the house of commons . we will have to sort that out outside . there was about a £ 350 million underspend in the farm budget under the previous government , who failed on their manifesto pledge to spend £ 2.4 billion a year on farmers . we are looking at everything as part of the spending review and decisions will be announced in due course . in my constituency we are about to hold regular water quality summits , alongside my hon . friend i can not speak for the secretary of state , but i am sure that all ministers will fight over any invitation to visit my hon . friend ’s gorgeous constituency . we are announcing a review into water . i urge him to participate and feed into that review . the sort of innovative model that brings partners together is certainly one we will be looking at . what steps he is taking to support british food producers . i congratulate the hon . lady on her achievement in the election . the labour government will restore stability and confidence in the sector , introducing a new deal for farmers to boost rural economic growth and strengthen food security alongside nature ’s recovery . we will make the supply chain work more fairly , back british produce , and cut energy prices through gb energy . we are continuing the roll - out of the sustainable farming initiative , and will optimise schemes and grants . in recent weeks , i have had the pleasure of meeting farmers in evenley at stowe heights farm and barnowl farm , two of the amazing producers in south northamptonshire . however , they and many other farmers are gravely concerned by media reports that the farming budget will be cut by £ 100 million . can the minister confirm that that is not the case , and that support for local producers is to be maintained ? those sound like wonderful farms to visit — i might even be tempted to pop in and see them myself . our farming minister , my hon . friend i call the shadow secretary of state . both in that answer and in the earlier answer from the environment minister , i hate to be the bearer of bad news , but i think the right hon . gentleman will find that it was the previous government — in fact , the department for which he was responsible — who underspent the farming budget , despite their promises to spend £ 2.4 billion a year . that underspend broke a manifesto promise . he will also remember , because it is not all that long ago that he was on the government benches , that decisions about the budget are made as part of the spending review . what recent progress he has made on increasing the accountability of water companies for pollution discharges into waterways . i welcome my outstanding former employee to her place in the chamber , and thank her for her question . after 14 years of conservative failure , the public are furious at the levels of sewage being released into our rivers , lakes and seas . last week , this government introduced the water ( special measures ) bill to strengthen the power of the water industry regulators and turn around the performance of failing water companies . the bill will ban bonuses for chief executives when environmental standards have not been met , and will bring forward criminal charges for obstruction . our canals are the pride of the black country : they are very important to our communities , our wildlife and our tourism . unfortunately , like the rest of the waterways , we have seen serious pollution incidents in the canals in recent years . what are the government doing to protect our canals and waterways and clean up the failures of the last government ? i congratulate my hon . friend on being such a champion for waterways in and around her constituency . toxic pollution of canals or , indeed , any other waterway is disgraceful and unacceptable . the previous government cut resources for the regulators , leaving them incapable of investigating all the incidents that were happening . we are putting firepower back with the regulators through the water ( special measures ) bill , which will allow them to claw back the costs of prosecution from the organisations that are prosecuted , so that they can carry out more enforcement against organisations that got away scot - free with polluting our waterways under the previous government . dozens of homes and businesses across alverstoke village in my constituency were flooded with polluted water from the alver creek when storm pierrick caused a tidal surge in april this year . we now hear that , without urgent flood protection measures , that could be a one - in-20 - years scenario . those measures will cost an extra £ 3.5 million , and we are waiting desperately for news from the secretary of state ’s department about whether we have been awarded that flood and coastal erosion risk management grant so that the work can start . we are now heading into winter , with higher tides , and some of my constituents still have not been able to return to their homes and businesses after the previous flooding event . what reassurance can the secretary of state give me that that announcement is coming soon , and will he please meet me urgently to discuss this scenario ? i congratulate the hon . member on winning her seat in the general election and taking her place . i will certainly make sure that the relevant minister is able to meet her to discuss that issue in more detail . i am very pleased that the first meeting of our new flood resilience taskforce will be later today . the intention of that organisation is to ensure much better co - ordination between whitehall at the centre , where the resources are held , and the agencies on the frontline that need to be taking appropriate action as quickly as possible to protect communities , businesses , farms and all of the rest of the people who can be affected by flooding , particularly given that we are seeing more frequent severe weather incidents because of climate change . i call the shadow minister . sound management of water companies is of course vital if customers are to receive the high level of service they expect and environmental performance obligations are to be strictly adhered to . some water companies are better managed than others , so will the secretary of state guarantee that in his efforts to hold water companies to account , no offer of a regulatory easement will be provided — in other words , no permission to lower standards , relax environmental permits or reduce agreed levels of investment will be provided to any water company , no matter their financial circumstances , by the government or the regulator ? i will be announcing later this autumn — in just a few weeks ’ time — a review of the entire water sector , including regulation . in particular , i want to make sure that regulation is as tough as possible to ensure that the practices and , frankly , the abuses that were going on can no longer happen . part of that will be complete transparency about what is going on — on the part of the water companies , and also , i have to say , on the part of government . it was very disappointing that , when he was a minister , the hon . gentleman tried to cover up the extent of sewage spills before the election , telling environment agency officials not to put the key figures on the front page of its environmental portal . order . saying that the hon . member “ tried to cover up ” is suggesting that a member is lying , and i do not — on a point of order , mr speaker . the right hon . member can not raise a point of order now . he has been here long enough to know that they come at the end of questions . [ interruption . ] order . i am dealing with this . we really have to reflect on what we say about other members in this house , and i would like the secretary of state to withdraw what he has suggested . i withdraw that comment . perhaps i should have said that the shadow minister could have been more open and transparent . [ interruption . ] order . i am not going to open up that question . we will now have the second question from robbie moore . thank you , mr speaker . so there we have it : the secretary of state ’s first outing at the dispatch box , and he was not able to clearly answer the question i asked . will the secretary of state confirm that , in fulfilling his obligation to hold water companies to account , he will not issue regulatory easements , no matter their financial circumstances ? will he answer that question clearly right now from the dispatch box ? as i have already said , we are looking to strengthen , not weaken the regulation . the regulation was inappropriate . it is not just the regulation itself , but the lack of resources the regulators have had . that is why the water ( special measures ) bill we are introducing will allow the regulators to claw back resources from water companies that are successfully prosecuted , so that they have the firepower to prosecute further wrongdoing by those water companies or others responsible for it . if he will maintain the level of funding for farming . what discussions he has had with the chancellor of the exchequer on funding for farming . if he will maintain the level of funding for farming . the government will restore stability and confidence in the sector by introducing a new deal for farmers to boost rural economic growth and strengthen food security alongside nature ’s recovery . the government are currently conducting a spending review , which will conclude in october . departmental budgets , including spending on farming , will be confirmed through this process . the labour party manifesto rightly stated that the labour party “ recognises that food security is national security . ” i agree , but those words must be matched with actions . we have already asked today about future budgets , but have not heard any answers . will the secretary of state confirm that there will be no real - terms cuts to the agriculture budget ? as the hon . member will know , there is a spending review process going on , which will culminate with announcements in the budget . that is the point at which all of that will be made clear and apparent . i would gently remind the hon . member that it was her government who underspent the farming budget by £ 130 million in the previous financial year . that money should have been in the pockets of farmers , who desperately need it for the work they are doing to provide the food we want to eat and to help nature ’s recovery , yet that government were too incompetent to get it out the door . this government will make sure that the money allocated to farmers is handed over to farmers so that they are able to use it for the purposes for which it is intended . being an mp for the scottish borders , i am lucky enough to represent some of the best farmers and food producers in the whole of the uk . however , as we have heard , the new government have chosen not to give them any clarity about their future funding settlement , so i ask again : can the secretary of state commit not to cut the funding for farmers and food production ? i congratulate the hon . gentleman on his appointment as shadow secretary of state for scotland . as i said previously , a spending review process is going on . no government announce their budget in advance of the budget taking place . i can not do that either , but i assure the hon . gentleman that we are keen to ensure that farmers in every single part of the united kingdom receive the support they need to do the job that we as a country need them to do to ensure that we have the food security that we want , because it is part of our national security , and that this country deserves . farmers in my constituency who receive funding through the sustainable farming incentive are concerned that some of the schemes are becoming over - subscribed and therefore their income is reducing . will the secretary of state give a reassurance that that particular initiative will continue and will do so at the existing funding levels ? i have been clear , throughout the election campaign and since , that we do not intend to overturn the applecart in respect of the old schemes in general , including the sfi . we support the principles behind the schemes and want to see them continue . in terms of what the hon . gentleman alluded to , there are ways to make them work better . my intention is to work closely with the farming sector and the nature sector to make sure that we get the maximum bang for our buck for every single penny that goes through those schemes , and that the farmers who need it get the support they deserve . british farmers have been badly let down by crippling trade deals , skyrocketing energy prices and devastating floods . will the secretary of state outline how he will restore confidence and support british farmers ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . there are all sorts of ways in which farmers have felt very let down over the past 14 years , and that has contributed to the tragic situation today in which we have the lowest levels of confidence ever recorded in the farming sector . our new deal for farming is intended to start to sort part of that out . my hon . friend referred to trade deals that undermine farmers ; they are furious about that , and at the national farmers union ’s back british farming day reception yesterday farmers made that clear to me again . we have ruled out any future trade deals that undercut and undermine british farmers in the way the previous government ’s australia and new zealand trade deals did . may i support your thanks to terry wiggins , mr speaker ? he has been a great servant of this house and is a lovely bloke . the conservative complaints about support for farmers are a bit lame . has the secretary of state had the opportunity yet to work out why there was an underspend of over £ 100 million in the agricultural budget last year ? my hon . friend raises an important point . opposition members are asking me today about budget decisions that they know can not be announced before the budget , when presumably they are aware — because the statement has been laid — that they underspent the previous budget to the tune of £ 130 million . it is not that they were not warned about this either , because while we were in opposition we were making points , as were farmers , about underspends and the desperate need to get that money back out to the farmers who needed access to it . we will review the situation , find out exactly what went wrong and publish that information as soon as it is available . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . somerset is home to 8,500 farmers and food producers , which is more than any other county in the uk . they are worried that the £ 130 million of support will be stripped from them because the previous government replaced the basic payment scheme with systems that were too complicated for many farmers to access . notwithstanding the previous comments , will the secretary of state confirm that he will not be slashing their funding , and give farmers the confidence that they need to be able to invest in the future and secure the nation ’s food security ? i am delighted to congratulate those farmers , producers and growers in somerset . it is a fine county and they do an incredibly good job , of which the hon . lady is rightly proud . i hope she will understand that i can not make comments about the budget in advance ; i would be in deep trouble with the chancellor of the exchequer , which is something i wish to avoid . at the appropriate time , we will make absolutely clear what we intend to do . my intention is to fight the corner of farmers through the spending review process so that we can make sure they receive the resources they deserve . what steps he is taking to support farmers . this labour government will introduce a new deal for farmers to boost rural economic growth and strengthen food security alongside nature recovery . we will make the supply chain work more fairly , better protect farmers from flooding and back british produce . we are continuing the roll - out of the sustainable farming initiative and will optimise schemes and grants to ensure that they work for farmers . it is the time of year when we thank farmers and nature for the harvest , and it has been a particularly difficult year . farmers are planning ahead for next year , so will the minister kindly give me a one - word answer to my question ? i understand that she can not announce what is in the spending review , but in the request that her department has made to the chancellor , is the amount she has asked for more or less than £ 2.4 billion ? i thank the hon . lady — dare i say , my hon . friend — for her question . yes , it is good to remind ourselves that this is the time of harvest , when we should all be grateful and give thanks . in answer to her question , as a previous chair of the treasury committee she knows that we can not make comments on the budget before it comes through . like the secretary of state , i do not wish to be in trouble with the chancellor either . right , we come to mike amesbury — let us see if he gets in trouble . thank you , mr speaker . last week , i met farmers in the frodsham part of my constituency who were asking for support to curtail the industrial thefts of gps systems . will the minister meet me to discuss that , with representatives of the national farmers union ? it is always a pleasure to meet my hon . friend , and i would be delighted to talk to him about that in more detail . if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . scotland ’s financial allocation will be confirmed through the spending review that concludes in october . as agriculture is devolved , it will be for the scottish government to allocate funding to farmers in scotland . the uk government are supporting farmers across the country with a new deal to boost economic growth and strengthen food security . we will protect farmers from being undercut in trade deals , make the supply chain work more fairly and back british produce . farming and agriculture are a vital part of the economy in west fife and in my constituency of dunfermline and dollar . yesterday , i was delighted to meet a delegation from nfu scotland . given the economic , social and environmental value of active farming and crofting in scotland , and its significant contribution to the wider uk economy , will the secretary of state share what he will do to ensure that food security and food production in scotland remain at the heart of our national security ? many of those issues are devolved to the scottish government . i have already held meetings with the scottish agriculture minister and we are due to meet again next week , and i will be making sure that we have a strong working relationship . where the uk government have a role in particular is with trade deals . many british producers were upset that because the previous government erected barriers to trade when they were told that they would continue to get open access to the european markets , they could no longer continue to sell their great british produce into those markets , damaging them economically and financially . we will be seeking a new veterinary deal with the european union to get those exports moving again . i remind those on the front bench that it is topical questions , so questions and answers have to be short and punchy . the thing is , i have to try to get in as many as i can . let us see a good example of that with the shadow secretary of state . the secretary of state has repeatedly talked tough with the water companies , yet the water ( special measures ) bill that he announced actually weakens a number of measures , such as the automatic fines for category 1 and 2 prosecutions , and removes the unlimited penalties that would apply . he said that the review of water regulation would strengthen requirements on water firms ; will he therefore confirm to the house that there will be no regulatory easements as part of that review ? the very bill that the right hon . gentleman referred to strengthens regulation . we will be looking further at regulation through the review . the intention will be to make it stronger , not weaker , because it was far too weak under the previous government and we need to turn that around . raw sewage was discharged into our rivers and seas for a shocking 4 million hours last year . will the minister reassure our coastal communities , including my own in worthing west , that water companies will be held accountable for the necessary investment to address the systemic and chronic pollution of our waters ? congratulations to my hon . friend on her election . she is absolutely right to be outraged at the level of sewage pumped into our rivers , lakes and seas under the previous government . i hope that where she saw inaction in the past , she will see this government taking action right now through our water ( special measures ) bill . we will not stand by and allow these levels of pollution to continue . water bills in the west midlands are set to increase by some 37 % by the end of the decade . many of my constituents are already struggling with the cost of living . what steps will the secretary of state take to stop private water companies ripping off consumers in the west midlands and to keep bills at an affordable level ? of course , we recognise the impacts of the cost of living on all our constituents , but the years of under - investment by the conservatives mean that we need £ 88 billion - worth of investment in the industry . customer bills will be ringfenced under the changes brought about by the government , and if that money is not spent on infrastructure improvement , it will be refunded to customers . of course , the final bills are determined by ofwat , not the government . my constituents in hastings and rye got their water bills this month . many of them were shocked to see their bills going up despite the failures of southern water , which include sewage dumped along our coastline , flooding in our town centre and leaving us without water . it has even charged us for the five days when the taps ran dry . what are the government doing to clean up the mess left by southern water and by the conservative party ? what has been going on in my hon . friend ’s constituency is completely unacceptable . i know that she has been a huge champion for cleaning up the water in that part of the country . one of the things we are looking at doing is doubling the rates of compensation from water companies when they let down their customers as she described . animal and plant health agency staff deserve our thanks for tackling a number of challenges facing our biosecurity . given the outbreaks of bluetongue in east anglia , the advance of african swine fever across europe , and the existing threats posed by avian influenza and bovine tuberculosis , will the minister support the apha by affirming that the government will fully commit to the redevelopment of its hq in weybridge — labour rightly called for that in opposition — to protect the uk ’s biosecurity , and human and animal health ? i welcome the hon . gentleman to his new seat and congratulate him on winning the royal society for the prevention of cruelty to animals ’ massingham advocacy award . the department remains vigilant to potential global disease threats and has robust measures in place to prevent and detect disease incursion . we will be looking at funding as part of the spending review , but i pay tribute to those officials and veterinary officers who are working so hard to tackle the outbreaks that the hon . gentleman mentioned . margate , broadstairs and ramsgate are bywords for the english seaside holiday , but thanet district council has to deal with the appalling levels of littering and fly - tipping that come with the popularity of our beautiful beaches . at the end of a hot , sunny day , 5,000 people will have descended on margate main sands , leaving them far from beautiful . the rubbish is an environmental and health hazard . of course , the challenge is a seasonal one . what plans do the government have to support coastal communities in tackling this blight ? i welcome my hon . friend to her place . we need to educate the public and ourselves that there is no such place as “ away ” and that when we bring our children and our picnics to the beach , we should consume the food and leave only footprints in the sand . i am convening a circular economy taskforce , and we will look at seasonal needs as part of that . any cuts to the environmental land management scheme would be a blow to farmers and to the government ’s climate and nature recovery missions . the nature - friendly farming budget needs to be not just maintained but increased . does the secretary of state agree with the economic assessment made by the royal society for the protection of birds , the national trust and the wildlife trusts that the environmental land management budget will need to be increased to around £ 5.9 billion a year to meet the targets ? the government remain fully committed to the elm schemes , and my right hon . friend the chancellor will make announcements about the budget at the appropriate time . under the conservative government , there were almost 18,000 hours of sewage dumping in my constituency in 2023 . what is the minister doing to ensure that yorkshire water cleans up its act and our beautiful river don ? i thank my hon . friend for her question and welcome her to her place . she is already a tireless champion for her constituency , and she has raised this issue with me in the past . our new water ( special measures ) bill will clean up our rivers , lakes and seas , undoing the damage left behind after 14 years of conservative rule . the secretary of state is certainly talking tough , but will he publish the justice impact test for his water ( special measures ) bill and list the additional court cases and prison places needed ? we will publish all information relating to the bill at the appropriate time during its passage through parliament . what action will the secretary of state and his department take to support farmers in addressing rural crime , which is a huge issue for farmers in my constituency and across essex ? i am pleased to say that i made a joint announcement with the home secretary that this will be the first government to have a cross - departmental rural crime strategy intended to cut the huge impact of rural crime on communities . biodiversity net gain is critical to replacing the loss we are experiencing in our environment and is now mandatory in planning applications — but with exemptions . those exemptions mean that most developers are avoiding biodiversity net gain , so what will the government do to tighten up the exemptions and make that more difficult ? this is a very new policy and has only just come into force , as the hon . lady will be aware . there are very limited exemptions in place at the moment , such as that on side returns on housing , but we are keeping the issue under active review and i am in discussions with officials about it . the bluetongue outbreak in haddiscoe is seriously concerning , and it is crucial that the animal and plant health agency is provided with sufficient resources to conduct testing swiftly . will my right hon . friend meet me to discuss this urgent matter ? i am happy to ensure that the relevant minister meets my hon . friend to discuss the issue . however , the apha and other authorities are doing a good job right now of containing a very worrying incident of bluetongue . in bexhill and battle we get to enjoy the amazing high weald area of outstanding natural beauty , but it is expansive , covering more than 1,400 sq km . what advice did the minister ’s department give the housing department on taking such issues into account when centrally imposed housing targets are putting pressure on the area as a whole ? it is important to remember that our national landscapes are protected landscapes and that the planning authorities work appropriately on such issues . i am in discussions with officials and i am happy to write to the hon . gentleman with a proper answer on the issue . in my constituency we also have confirmed cases of bluetongue , and i recently met a farmer who lost six pregnant ewes last week . will the minister meet me to discuss the issue and how we can support farmers in my constituency and across the east of england ? i will happily ensure that my hon . friend gets a meeting , perhaps with our hon . friend before the school summer holidays , 26 year 3 students at holy trinity primary school in cookham wrote to me about sewage in the thames . they are really concerned that water companies are allowed to get away with putting sewage in our water . will the minister meet me and students at holy trinity to discuss their concerns ? as a former primary school teacher , how can i not say yes to a meeting with the students from my hon . friend ’s constituency ? i am already looking forward to it . i am very concerned about the future of the thetford biomass facility in my constituency . every year , it turns half a million tonnes of poultry litter into electricity . has the secretary of state had meetings to discuss the potential impact of the end of the renewables obligation scheme on the disposal of poultry litter ? we are in the early stages of looking at how we deal with the country ’s waste and considering the policies we will bring forward . this will be looked at as part of the review . we will be working with colleagues from the department for energy security and net zero to ensure we get the right results . will the secretary of state meet me and the environment agency to discuss the closure of marsh lock bridge on the thames path in henley - on - thames ? i would be happy to meet the hon . gentleman and the environment agency to discuss the matter in more detail . the solicitor general was asked — if she will make an assessment of the potential merits of extending the unduly lenient sentence scheme to include unduly severe sentences . it is a privilege to be appointed as his majesty ’s solicitor general . my fellow law officers and i will be working to restore public faith in government and the rule of law , and to support the home secretary and the lord chancellor in delivering our safer streets mission . sentencing policy is quintessentially a matter for the ministry of justice ; sentencing is a matter for our judges . offenders already have the right to appeal to the court of appeal against their sentences , including when they consider them to be unduly excessive . since decisions to prosecute , convict and sentence are rightly made independently of government by the crown prosecution service , juries and judges respectively . as i have already said , if someone wants to appeal an unduly excessive sentence , they can do so and our courts are there to handle that matter . i welcome the new chair of the justice committee . thank you , mr speaker . the government have pledged to undertake a review of sentencing generally . i wonder whether i can tempt the solicitor general to support a wider review of aspects of the criminal justice system that do not seem to be working , in particular the role of the criminal cases review commission and the cps in dealing with potential miscarriages of justice . this week , oliver campbell ’s conviction for murder was quashed by the court of appeal as unsafe . the criminal cases review commission was asked to look at the case in 2005 . the cps resisted the appeal and asked for a retrial after 33 years . first , i welcome my hon . friend and congratulate him on his election as chair of the justice committee . he is right that we will be undertaking a review of sentencing . on miscarriages of justice , we will want to work with him to look into that further . i am happy to meet him to discuss such matters . i call the shadow attorney general . may i first warmly welcome the solicitor general to her place , and the attorney general to his place in the other place , in what the solicitor general will already know is one of the most interesting and challenging parts of government ? while i am at it , i should of course also welcome i do not know for how long the solicitor general and i will have these exchanges over the dispatch boxes , but i am glad to be able to start on a note of consensus . i agree with her that it would not be appropriate to extend the unduly lenient sentence scheme to cover unduly severe sentences , for which , as she says , appeal is already available , but she will agree that the scheme is always capable of improvement . it is currently wholly reactive , responding to requests from others for sentences to be reviewed . may i ask the solicitor general to consider the merits of her department , and indeed the ministry of justice — i see that the minister of state , ministry of justice , i thank the right hon . and learned member for his question , and also for his warm welcome . he is enormously experienced in these matters , as both a former attorney general and a former justice minister . as he rightly notes , newly created offences , such as those created by the online safety act 2023 , do not currently fall within the scope of the unduly lenient sentencing scheme , and i understand that there are no immediate plans to extend the scheme further , but — again , as he rightly notes — we always look for opportunities to reform , and , along with my department , i will keep that under review . what steps she is taking to help increase prosecution rates for cases relating to violence against women and girls . what steps she is taking to help increase prosecution rates for cases relating to violence against women and girls . what steps she is taking to help increase prosecution rates for cases relating to violence against women and girls . what steps she is taking to help increase prosecution rates for cases relating to violence against women and girls . for too long , women and girls across the country have faced routine threats of appalling violence and abuse . this government were elected with a clear mandate to halve violence against women and girls within a decade ; that is what we will deliver , and it is something to which i am personally committed . in the early stages of that process , i have recently met both the domestic abuse commissioner and the victims ’ commissioner to discuss how the crown prosecution service can work closely with the police from the earliest point to build robust , victim - centred investigations that will drive improvements in conviction rates . i , too , welcome the solicitor general to her position . she will be aware of the appalling increase in crimes against women and girls throughout the united kingdom , including my constituency and greater manchester more widely . more than a million such crimes were recorded last year , constituting both 20 % of all crimes logged and an increase in the number of violent crimes against women and girls . given the seriousness of the situation , what plans do the government have to ensure that we prosecute effectively and quickly ? i congratulate my hon . friend on her election as chair of the work and pensions committee . the statistics that she has given are indeed worrying , and the mission of halving violence against women and girls is therefore central to the government ’s agenda . behind each of those statistics lie heartbreaking personal stories . we need to do much better , which is why the lord chancellor has committed herself to introducing specialist rape courts to fast - track rape cases and why the home office is delivering plans to introduce specialist rape and sexual offence teams in every police force . it is measures of that kind that will address the problems highlighted by my hon . friend . the 2023 police efficiency , effectiveness and legitimacy report on thames valley police established that the force did not make full use of clare ’s law . does the solicitor general agree that clare ’s law is a powerful tool to protect women from those who have already been prosecuted for domestic violence ? i thank my hon . friend for raising an important issue . he is right : clare ’s law is a powerful tool , and it needs to be applied more evenly and consistently . the domestic violence disclosure scheme , known as clare ’s law , enables the police to disclose information to a victim , or potential victim , of domestic abuse about previous abusive or violent offending by a partner or ex - partner . the police need to consider each request on its own merits . however , more needs to be done to ensure that the scheme is used consistently by police forces across the country , and i understand that the home office is currently engaging with the police to see how its application can be improved . may i warmly welcome the solicitor general to her place ? i am sure she agrees that the dreadful legacy of the last government ’s record on rape convictions can not be allowed to continue . she knows that behind the statistics — less than 2 % of rapes are prosecuted — lie real people such as a woman in my constituency of monmouthshire , who has been waiting on a cps decision for two years and three months . her life has been on hold and in limbo as she waits to hear whether the perpetrator will be charged . she has summoned up the courage to report , and we can not leave her or anyone else in indefinite limbo . can the solicitor general share what progress has been made on the introduction of the government ’s new rape courts ? what impact does she expect them to have on the time lag between reporting and charging , and on prosecution rates for those charged with violence against women ? i absolutely share my hon . friend ’s concerns . as her constituent ’s heartbreaking experience illustrates , such delays are traumatic for victims . they too often lead to what is known as victim attrition , which leads to trials collapsing and deters others from reporting these sorts of offences . this has gone on for far too long , and we need to get a grip on the situation . that is why the lord chancellor has committed to introducing specialist rape courts and working with the judiciary to drive down wait times . obviously , those need to be carefully considered while navigating other pressures on the justice system , and i hope to be able to update the house on the government ’s plan in due course . between 2022 and 2023 , my constituency of knowsley had the highest number of deaths per capita due to domestic abuse , but very few people are charged for domestic abuse , let alone prosecuted . will the law officers meet me to discuss how we can join up the criminal justice system so that the police and prosecutors work together to take dangerous abusers off our streets ? my hon . friend is absolutely right to highlight the incredibly distressing figures . as i said before , the human stories that lie behind them will each tell a tragic tale , which is why tackling this issue is at the heart of this government ’s agenda . i am happy to meet my hon . friend and her local chief crown prosecutor , jonathan storer , to discuss this serious issue and look at how we can improve joint working between the cps and the police . may i congratulate the solicitor general on her appointment ? among the most serious offences involving women and girls are rape and serious sexual offences . once victims come forward , there are often delays in their cases being heard , and a frequent driver of that is the difficulty in getting sufficiently experienced counsel . a major driver of that is the gap between the fees for prosecuting and defending counsel . does the solicitor general agree that there is an urgent need to plug that gap ? we know that the availability of sufficiently experienced prosecutors is a problem that needs to be looked at . that is why , in appropriate cases , we are looking at using associate prosecutors to clear the backlog in our courts more generally , but for the most serious crimes of rape and violence against women and girls , we need specialist prosecutors . the government will be looking closely at both recruitment and retention . may i welcome the solicitor general to her place ? i wish her well in the role and hope that it goes according to plan . can she further clarify that funding is available for each branch of the prosecution services to provide the protection and support that helps victims to speak out ? is there any discussion about whether increased funding for victim support could embolden victims and help to facilitate even more safe prosecutions ? it is vital that we place victims at the centre of our justice system , which is why this government are looking to strengthen the powers of the victims ’ commissioner . as we announced in the king ’s speech , the victims , courts and public protection bill will strengthen those powers to improve accountability and ensure that victims ’ voices are centred and heard from start to finish throughout the criminal justice process . i call the shadow solicitor general . may i , too , welcome the solicitor general not just to the house , but to her place ? i thank the shadow attorney general for his warm words and for the good nature of yesterday ’s election . only a few weeks ago , the national police chiefs ’ council and the college of policing issued a joint national policing statement on violence against women and girls , which said : “ we are transforming the way police officers investigate rape and serious sexual offences and over the last year we have trained over 4,500 new officers in investigating this complex crime . ” the solicitor general does not have direct responsibility for policing services , but she did say that she would be working with her home office and ministry of justice colleagues , so can she confirm that those 4,500 newly trained officers , who were trained under the previous conservative government , will dedicate the majority of their policing activities to working on cases exclusively involving violence against women and girls ? i echo other hon . members in congratulating the hon . gentleman . as we have said , the mission to halve violence against women and girls within the next decade is a central priority for the government . one aspect of that will be cross - departmental working between the attorney general ’s office , the home office and the ministry of justice , as well as with other departmental colleagues . it is an absolute priority and at the moment — in the earliest stages — we are looking at exactly how we will do that . it is right that those priorities are communicated to every branch of the criminal justice system , including policing , the crown prosecution service and other agencies involved . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . just one in 83 rape offences recorded by avon and somerset police last year resulted in a charge or court summons . compared with other police forces in the south - west , that represents a significant increase in 2023 - 24 for rape and sexual offence crimes . does the solicitor general agree that more needs to be done to strengthen the justice system as a whole to properly deal with sexual violence and domestic abuse , not just in avon and somerset but across england and wales ? i entirely agree with the hon . member that this needs to be an absolute priority and that we need to drive improvements in conviction rates . that is why there is a commitment to introduce specialist rape courts , working to fast - track rape cases and driving down wait times , and why it is important , at the start of the system , to put domestic abuse experts in 999 control rooms . it is that whole suite of measures that will lead to the improvements that we all want to see . what steps she is taking to help increase prosecution rates for shoplifting . our safer streets mission will drive essential change to bring an end to the epidemic of shoplifting that is plaguing our high streets . between 2018 and 2023 , under the last government , the charge rate for shoplifting offences went down significantly , by 5 % , so we are seeing 10,000 fewer charges a year . rather than criminalising vulnerable people , this government believe that criminal gangs have been emboldened by poor enforcement and immunity for low - level shoplifting . we are not prepared to stand by and allow that to continue , which is why the time is right to take action against that unacceptable behaviour . i congratulate the solicitor general on their appointment . the british retail consortium identified a £ 1.7 billion cost to traders from the offence . having spoken to traders in torquay and paignton , i know that it has a massive impact on the viability of them trading on our high streets . how will the solicitor general ensure that we expedite shoplifting prosecutions ? i thank the hon . gentleman for raising this matter . members will be all too aware of the impact that such offences have on our constituents , whether they are customers or business owners . the police are working closely with cps colleagues to prosecute shoplifting , but we know there is more to do . among additional measures , the government will introduce a new offence of assaulting retail workers , in order to protect the hard - working and dedicated staff who work in those stores . there are other things that we can do , but that is a start . what steps she is taking to help ensure rioters are prosecuted efficiently and effectively . what steps she is taking to help ensure rioters are prosecuted efficiently and effectively . there seem to have been a lot of congratulations this morning , and i congratulate my hon . friend the prime minister and the home secretary have been clear that there is no place for senseless violence on our streets . during the summer , after the recent disorder , the crown prosecution service deployed an additional 100 prosecutors , expanded its 24 - hour charging service and received additional advice from the director of public prosecutions to enable it to charge more quickly . the deterrent effects of this swift action are an example of how the system can work well when it works together . i thank the solicitor general for her kind words , and i congratulate her in turn on her appointment . i also congratulate the government on their excellent response to the riots over the summer , which she has just outlined . my hon . and learned friend has talked about the early release scheme , which is , of course , the result of the shortage of prison places inherited from the previous government , but does she agree that those convicted and imprisoned as a result of the riots , and those imprisoned for inciting the riots , should not benefit from the early release scheme ? i express my solidarity with my hon . friend and his constituents , who will have been closely affected by the awful recent events in his neighbouring constituency . i know the attorney general was deeply moved by his recent visit to southport and what he learned there . on the early release scheme , my hon . friend will have heard the lord chancellor set out very clearly this week the importance of taking action on the mess on prison places that this government inherited . without the action we have taken , courts would have been unable to hold trials , the police would have been unable to make arrests and there would have been a total breakdown of law and order . the lord chancellor has provided details of the scheme , including its carefully considered safeguards . the scheme will apply across the board to all offenders , including rioters and those convicted of the most serious offences . it is wonderful to see my hon . and learned friend at the dispatch box . i also congratulate the government on the speediness with which justice has been done for many of the summer ’s rioters , which is testament to the good work of the cps and defence lawyers . what lessons can be learnt more generally to ensure that speedy justice can occur for specific offences , particularly domestic violence ? the main lesson that we can take from this is how well the system can work when all of its constituent parts — the police , the leadership at the top of government , and the cps — all pull in the same direction . that approach will inform this government ’s commitment to mission - led government , which will bring all the key elements of the criminal justice system together and ensure that decisions are taken with the whole system in mind . that will particularly apply to the mission on halving violence against women and girls . what steps she is taking to help ensure the effective prosecution of street crime . this government have made tackling antisocial behaviour , which blights our streets and threatens many of our communities , a top priority . the new crime and policing bill announced in the king ’s speech will include strong measures to tackle antisocial behaviour , to support neighbourhood policing and to give the police stronger powers to crack down on antisocial behaviour and keep our streets safe . what we have noticed , particularly in town centres such as ramsgate and margate , is that antisocial behaviour , drug dealing and street crime , particularly knife crime , continue because of people ’s anxiety about giving evidence against the criminals . what will my hon . and learned friend and the government do to give people confidence that the criminal justice system and prosecutions will flow once they have given their evidence ? just this week the prime minister met police , victims , families and media companies specifically to discuss knife crime , which plagues my hon . friend ’s community and many others across the country . the prime minister has promised to double down on these crimes , and to halve them in the next decade . i am part of a cross - departmental team that will work to deliver this . the government are committed to taking back our streets by increasing the amount of neighbourhood policing , recruiting more prosecutors to deal swiftly with these crimes and bringing forward laws to ban zombie knives and machetes . 10.39 am on a point of order , mr speaker . transparency of justice is vital . to that end , members of this house should be freely able to see exactly what happens at any trial in this country . yet when i tried to obtain a transcript of the lucy letby trial from manchester crown court , i was told it would cost me £ 100,000 . that number eventually reduced to £ 9,000 . in any event , that is more than any of us in this house can afford . it is critical that parliamentarians have free access to that kind of data . will the house authorities talk to the relevant government department to ensure that transcripts of all trials are freely available to members of this house ? this is not a matter for the chair , but i know that the right hon . gentleman is not the only member with concerns about the cost of such transcripts . i will ask the house authorities to look into the matter , because such costs inhibit members . the outrageous amount of £ 100,000 prohibits members of parliament from carrying out their duty on behalf of their constituents . the solicitor general is in the chamber , so i hope that she will take these comments on board and let us speak to the company concerned . i will also take the matter up with the clerks of the house . does the solicitor general wish to make a comment ? if not , let us proceed . will the leader of the house provide a statement about forthcoming business ? the business for the week commencing the provisional business for the week commencing the business announced for the first week back strikes me as extraordinarily light . there is only a single piece of substantive government business and half the time will be taken up with general debate . this “ government of service ” seem to be taking it pretty easy . in fact , after 70 days , only 13 bills have been introduced . i looked up the record of the previous government . i discovered that they introduced 31 new bills in 100 days following the 2019 election . the right hon . lady has quite a lot of work to do in the next 30 days , if she is going to catch up with boris johnson . millions of pensioners are sick with worry following the vote earlier this week to strip them of the winter fuel allowance , including pensioners in poverty . i acknowledge and recognise the 53 courageous labour mps who did not support that appalling measure , but the other 350 did vote for it . i join the leader of the opposition in urgently calling on the government to publish the impact assessment . on i also call for an urgent debate on the management of the early release scheme for prisoners . the justice secretary came to this house on “ members have shared examples where those with both domestic violence offences and sexual offences have been released ” . he goes on to say that his members — prison officers — “ are extremely disappointed that this has been denied during several media appearances by government ministers ” . he calls on the government to correct the record , and i call on the leader of the house to do so now : to correct the record and correct the inaccurate information that her colleagues have provided to the public . some of the examples of those being released early , contrary to the assurances that the justice secretary gave to this house , are appalling . lawson natty , age 20 , who is due for early release , provided the machete that was used to kill 14 - year - old gordon gault , whose mother describes herself as “ sickened ” by the early release . adam andrews , who is also due for early release , brutally assaulted a 21 - day - old baby , leaving that baby blind and paralysed . we were promised that serious violent offenders would not be released early . that promise appears to have been broken . not a government of service ; a government of shameful incompetence . it has been 70 days since the election and it has been a pretty terrible start to government : pensioners in poverty have been stripped of their winter fuel allowance , while there are inflation - busting pay rises for train drivers who already earn £ 65,000 a year ; labour party donors have been appointed to civil service positions ; and there has been the botched release of prisoners , contrary to promises made to this house that violent offenders would not be released early . no wonder the government ’s approval ratings have plummeted at what , as far as i can see , is the fastest rate for any government in modern times . the rates now stand at minus 36 % . but not to worry : the government do have one new supporter . mr djaber benallaoua says that he will now be “ a lifelong labour voter ” . the only problem is that he is a convicted drug dealer who is very happy about his early release . not so much a government of service as a government for their donors , for their trade union paymasters , and for violent criminals who they promised would not be released early , but who they did in fact release . may i start by welcoming the news that the princess of wales has completed her chemotherapy and is moving on to the next stage of her recovery ? like you , mr speaker , i place on the record my thanks to the speaker ’s chaplain , the venerable patricia hillas , in her final week . we thank her for her contribution to this house . i congratulate all the newly elected select committee chairs ; they play a very important role in this house . i also send my regards to terry wiggins , who has served us as a chef for an astonishing 50 years . we all know terry as the mainstay of the debate , and i am sure that he will miss serving up the famous house of commons jerk chicken . i know that he is looking forward to having more time for walking with his dogs . they must be the best - fed dogs in the country . this week , for the first time in 14 years , a labour bill became an act . the budget responsibility act 2024 ensures that there can never again be a repeat of liz truss ’s disastrous mini - budget . it comes as we grapple with the £ 22 billion black hole left by the conservative party — what a stark reminder that is of the importance of economic stability . the theme this week is the government honouring their commitment to all those who have been let down . we have published the renters ’ rights bill , which will finally end no - fault evictions — a measure long promised but never realised . in order to help unlock town centre regeneration , we have begun reform of outdated compulsory rules — levelling up , remember that ? and to the workers of port talbot steel left hanging by the previous government , the business and trade secretary announced a new deal , welcomed by workers and their representatives . today , we introduce the terrorism ( protection of premises ) bill , otherwise known as martyn ’s law , meeting a promise that the prime minister made to figen murray , who lost her son martyn hett in the manchester arena attack . i am personally delighted that we are doing this today . this is a government of service , delivering their manifesto , sticking to their promises and cleaning up the mess left by the conservative party . work began this week on another commitment that we made , with the first meeting of the modernisation committee . i thank members from across the house who have joined and contributed to the process so far , including the shadow leader of the house and we seem to be developing a common theme in these exchanges . the conservatives lost the election badly because they crashed the economy , made people worse off and did not fix the foundations of this country . the shadow leader of the house seems to think that we can just carry on as we were , but we saw that movie and it did not end well . the shadow leader of the house asks me about the prisons crisis—[interruption . ] okay , he say it was the management of the prisoner release scheme . let us just remember that we inherited from the conservatives prisons on the point of collapse . after the riots , we came within 100 places of our prisons overflowing . if we had not acted , courts would not have been able to hold trials and the police would not have been able to make arrests . our entire criminal justice system was on the brink of collapse . police chiefs warned his government that failing to act before the election would increase the risk considerably , including the risk of serious disorder . what did his government do ? absolutely nothing . we took the difficult decisions that we had to in order to ensure that our prisons and the whole criminal justice system did not collapse . the previous government ducked the big issues , as ever ; we acted . i will not take any lectures from him about that . i notice that the shadow leader of the house did not ask me about the nhs . the damning findings of the darzi report , out this morning , are another utterly unforgiveable example of the state of public services that we inherited from the conservative party . the true scale of the crisis in our nhs , experienced by all our constituents , family and friends every day , has been laid bare this morning . does he want to take the opportunity to apologise for that ? no , i did not think he would . i also notice that the shadow leader of the house did not repeat the claim that he often makes that the previous government left us a booming economy . is that because yesterday ’s growth figures confirmed what we all know : that under his party ’s watch , we had no growth , falling living standards and a stagnant economy ? that is the legacy of his party , and he knows it . we are fixing the foundations and stabilising the economy . that is why the conservatives lost and we won . we will not put our heads in the sand . we are keeping our promises — to renters , to steelworkers , and , today , to figen murray — and restoring the trust in politics squandered by the conservative party . this is the change that the country voted for , and the change that we are delivering . will the leader of the house find time for a debate on glioblastoma drug treatments ? as mr speaker and she will know , 3,200 people each year are diagnosed with this death sentence . it is the largest killer of the under-40s , and life expectancy at five years is just 5 % . without government intervention in the pharmaceutical industry and the nhs , there will be no improvement for another 40 years , and we will continue to see the same number of people traumatised , dead and scandalised . i thank my hon . friend for raising this important matter . i know what an amazing campaigner she has become on the issue of brain cancers , following the tragic death of her much loved sister , margaret , whom we all dearly miss to this day . my hon . friend and i both know many people affected by this terrible disease , which is the killer of so many , and delivers people such a terrible prognosis . it is absolutely heartbreaking . i will ensure that the health secretary has heard what she has said . should she apply for a debate on the subject , i am sure that it would be very welcome to the house . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . i thank the leader of the house for announcing the forthcoming business , and echo her in wishing the princess of wales all the best in her further recovery . may i also say how proud it makes me that the first opposition day debate in the name of the liberal democrats has been announced ? tomorrow marks the beginning of the jane austen festival in bath . it is the largest festival of its kind , and a wonderful occasion to celebrate one of the city ’s most famous residents . everybody here is invited to come and celebrate jane austen in bath ’s regency glory . austen is one of the uk ’s best known female authors , and her writing is still known hundreds of years after she wrote her famous novels . she was a strong advocate for education and broke down barriers for women in education and literature , which makes it all the more disappointing that even today many students will not study a female author at gcse . a shameful 2 % of students did , according to end sexism in schools . it is not just when it comes to the authorship of novels that women lack representation ; over 70 % of the set texts offered by the most popular awarding body have both a male author and a male protagonist . diverse literature enriches children ’s education . there is a wealth of inspiring novels written by women that children unfortunately do not get to read in school . if the next generation is to grow up challenging male dominance in society , boys and girls need to be exposed to empowering representations of women . we need more pride and less prejudice in the curriculum . in the light of the government ’s upcoming curriculum and assessment review , can we have a statement from a minister on how to address the gender bias in english literature ? what a wonderful issue to raise in business questions . i wish the residents of bath , and everybody across this country , good wishes in celebrating the fabulous work of jane austen . i have not had time to think of a better pun than the one that the hon . lady weaved into her tribute , but she is right that women , young girls , and young boys really should study female authors , and understand the contribution that women have made to the progress of society across not just culture , the arts and literature but science , engineering and technology . they are too often forgotten in our history and curriculum . i am sure that this matter figures in our curriculum review , and i will ensure that the secretary of state for education has heard her very good question . i associate myself with the words of the leader of the house about terry wiggins . i knew terry over 50 years ago , as we grew up in the same area . he is also a commissioner of scouts in greenwich , and he puts a lot into our local community . will the leader of the house consider the contaminated blood scandal as a possible subject for debate on i thank my hon . friend for that question . he will be aware that in the short time we have been in government , there have been two statements to the house on the infected blood compensation scheme . over the summer , the government worked at pace , and incredibly hard , to ensure that our statutory deadline for establishing the compensation scheme was met by i call and welcome the chair of the backbench business committee . thank you , mr speaker . i urge the leader of the house to publish the membership numbers for select committees , and urge the usual channels to get on with populating those committees , in particular of course the backbench business committee , so that we can start to schedule the debates that back benchers , rather than the government , want to table . the leader of the house has not announced when the tobacco and vapes bill will come back . in committee , i and many labour members proposed amendments to the then government ’s bill that we will want to progress . i realise that the matter will be considered by the health secretary . will the leader of the house also take away and consider the view that shisha lounges and the sale of paan need to be included in the measures ? otherwise , we will leave escape clauses for those who want to resist taking action on mouth , throat and lung cancer . i welcome the hon . gentleman , following his election , to his position as chair of the backbench business committee . i know what fantastic work he did as vice - chair of the committee in the previous parliament , as he and i were in these sessions together for many hours . i look forward to working with him , and have already been in touch with him to fix up a meeting at the earliest opportunity , so that we can table forthcoming business in the chamber . we will absolutely work at pace to populate the committees and get them up and running as quickly as possible . we announced in the king ’s speech that we would take forward the tobacco and vapes bill , which will come to the house in due course . one issue that the secretary of state is considering is how to strengthen the bill before we introduce it by looking at amendments from the previous session . may i say how good it is to see my right hon . friend in her role as leader of the house ? the competition and markets authority , backed by the court of appeal , found that pharmaceutical firms auden mckenzie and actavis uk charged excessive and unfair prices for hydrocortisone tablets . nhs spending on those products rose from around £ 500,000 to over £ 80 million a year . producers gaming the system to gouge the nhs is a bad look . tens of thousands of people depend on those tablets to treat conditions such as addison ’s disease . may we have a statement on nhs procurement ? our new plan for procurement must prevent bad actors from ripping off our nhs . i thank my hon . friend for his kind words . it is a pleasure to continue working with him in this new session , as i did so closely in the last . he is a real champion for transparency , accountability and value for money in government , and he raises those important matters today . he may wish to raise them after business questions , during the statement on the nhs audits that have just been carried out , as procurement is a key part of those findings . i recently visited lindsey lodge hospice , which serves my constituents along with st andrew ’s hospice in grimsby . they rely on government for approximately a third of their income . obviously , there were concerns that that income may be reduced in the near future . the volunteers do tremendous work , but they need that government support . will the leader of the house arrange for a statement from the secretary of state for health and social care to reassure those hospices about their future income streams ? that topic came up a lot in last week ’s business questions , so i am sure that there would be wide support for the hon . gentleman ’s request . the role that hospices play in end - of - life care is critical to this country . i think it would surprise most people to understand that the vast majority of hospice funding is charitable and not from the government . i encourage him to apply for a debate , because i think that he would get a lot of support . i call patricia ferguson , whom i congratulate on her election to the chair of the scottish affairs committee . thank you , mr speaker . will the leader of the house comment on the government ’s actions to reset the relationship with the scottish government ? the early meeting of our right hon . friend the prime minister with the first minister of scotland was widely welcomed , but what more can be done to ensure that both governments work together to deliver for the people of scotland ? i congratulate my hon . friend on her election to the chair of the select committee . i know that she will approach that job with gusto and be a powerful voice on those issues in the chamber . she is absolutely right : it is important for us to work constructively and in a grown - up way with the scottish government . the prime minister has begun the process of resetting the relationship . i myself have met the scottish first minister , and i will go up to scotland in the coming weeks . we also want to strengthen the sewel convention , to which i know she will give great consideration as the chair of the select committee . may i pick up on the question asked by i congratulate the hon . lady , too , on becoming chair of the culture , media and sport committee . i know she will perform the role with great passion and diligence as she did in the last session . the hon . lady is absolutely right . the compensation scheme is now established . those infected will receive their compensation by the end of this year , and those affected can expect to receive their compensation in 2025 . there will be further statements from the paymaster general as the compensation scheme progresses . may i draw the attention of the house to early - day motion 169 , which expresses my concern about the low threshold for pension credit and its cliff - edge nature ? [ that this house notes that the current threshold of pension support to open the gate way of winter fuel allowance is too low ; further notes the need to change the cliff - edge nature of the pension credit threshold ; and calls upon the government to capture the gateway support for those citizens with small occupational pensions that take them just above the threshold . ] will we have a ministerial statement on how the government are going to address that ? my hon . friend is a fantastic campaigner for those who are on the breadline or struggling , especially the many pensioners in his constituency . i know he will continue to raise those matters with the government , as he should and is right to do . we have protected the triple lock , which has increased the state pension by £ 900 this year and over £ 400 next year . we are ensuring that there is other support for pensioners on pension credit and aligning that with housing benefit . i encourage him to keep raising these questions and i will ensure that the secretary of state has heard his call for a further statement . the issue of special educational needs funding is well known in the house . local authorities are still waiting for clarity on an extension to the statutory override that allows them to fund the shortfall from core council budgets , including their reserves . the deficit in bournemouth , christchurch and poole , where many of my constituents ’ children go to school , has reached £ 64 million with reserves at just £ 65 million . councils are not permitted to borrow to fund the deficit , and without urgent action they will be unable to set a legally balanced budget in february . will time be made for the house to discuss special educational needs and disabilities funding and local government finance before well - run councils such as bcp become insolvent and more vulnerable children are failed ? i thank the hon . lady for bringing up an issue that is raised frequently with me and other ministers , because , too often , those with special educational needs find that our education system does not cater for them . our children ’s wellbeing bill will come to the house in due course . it will require all schools to co - operate with local authorities on special educational needs inclusions . there will be further announcements about education funding as part of the comprehensive spending review . this tuesday was world suicide prevention day . sadly , the latest statistics from the office for national statistics show that suicide rates are higher than we have seen for two decades . these are not just statistics ; they are people , and each suicide affects families , friends , colleagues and communities . suicide is preventable , not inevitable , so can we have a debate in government time on how we can prevent these dreadful suicides ? suicide remains one of the biggest killers of young people in this country , and the figures are growing . it is a terrible blight on all those who are left behind and many people struggle to come to terms with it . any action that we can take on suicide prevention is action that we will take , and putting mental health on a parity with physical health is a key part of the reforms that the secretary of state will be discussing in a statement shortly . many constituents across the worth valley , keighley and the wider area are deeply concerned about proposals to construct 65 wind turbines on walshaw moor in calderdale . that development will have a hugely detrimental impact on the carbon storage capacity of the peat bogs and on the ecology , but also on local communities , and i am staunchly opposed to it . constituents are concerned that as a result of labour ’s choice to remove the moratorium on the development of onshore wind farms , that development is more likely to take place . could we have a debate in government time on the negative impacts of the government ’s choice to remove the moratorium on onshore wind farms ? we make no apology for removing that moratorium , because it is absolutely critical that we increase the capacity of wind and clean energy in this country to lower bills and give us the energy security and independence that is crucial to the future of our economy and our wellbeing . the hon . gentleman might want to raise this issue at energy security and net zero questions , which will take place on due to a legacy of financial mismanagement and effective bankruptcy left by the previous conservative administration , services in my constituency have been cut to the quick . that includes home - to - school transport for children with special educational needs and disabilities — including children under the age of five and young people between 16 and 19 years old — which local authorities do not have a statutory requirement to provide . given the well - documented positive impact of early intervention , particularly for children with send , and the devastating effect on children aged 16 to 19 of removal of provision at that point of their development , will the leader of the house allow time to discuss whether the statutory framework meets the needs of all children with send for home - to - school transport ? my hon . friend raises an incredibly important issue . as she has said , local authorities have a statutory duty to arrange free home - to - school travel for children of compulsory school age , but many others fall outside of that obligation . i will ensure that the secretary of state for education has heard my hon . friend ’s plea . if she applied for an adjournment debate on this matter , i am sure that it would be granted . i will be running business questions for about another 40 minutes , so to help each other , shorter questions and brief answers might be a way to get everybody in . if people are disappointed , they should look to colleagues who may have taken too long . the economic crime and corporate transparency act 2023 introduced the requirement that directors and other individuals verify their identity before being listed at companies house . i have found company directors whose registered addresses simply do not exist , which at the least means that papers can not be served , and at the worst enables fraud and other crime . may we have a debate on the progress of two things : the secondary legislation that needs to be passed for those basic checks to take place ; and an update on how companies house ’s systems are progressing to allow directors ’ identities to be checked ? the hon . lady raises an important technical matter , and i will certainly look into the progress of that statutory instrument . given that she has such expertise and diligence in this space , she might want to consider going on the public accounts committee or other committees as those places come up in the coming weeks . earlier this week , i met a constituent who was distressed by the fact that enhertu — which could extend her life by two years — will not be available in england on the nhs . may we have a debate in government time on the impact of the national institute for health and care excellence ’s new methods of evaluating health technologies , and in particular , the impact on secondary breast cancer of not approving life - extending medicines for nhs use that might have been approved under nice ’s earlier evaluation methods ? nice ’s agreement to the use of drugs on the nhs is a very topical issue that comes up in the chamber , including at business questions , many times over . my hon . friend might want to raise this issue at health questions after we return from recess , but i will certainly ensure that the relevant minister has heard her call today . i would be grateful for some help and advice from the leader of the house . when the winter fuel announcement was made , i wrote to the treasury and was told three times no , it was a department for work and pensions issue . following that logic , when it came to vat on school fees , i wrote to the department for education , and much to my surprise it told me that assessing its impact was a treasury issue . i am therefore stuck on a merry - go - round of trying to find out how this policy , which is due to be introduced in january , will impact on my constituents . will she advise me on how i can do that , and would she be kind enough to ask the education secretary to meet me to discuss the impact on my constituents of vat going on private school fees ? i am sure the education secretary would be happy to answer the hon . member ’s questions on that . it a clear policy of this government . we want to ensure that the 93 % of children who attend state schools get access to the high - quality education and expert teachers they desperately need , and that is why we are imposing vat on private school fees . our analysis suggests that many schools and parents will be able to absorb that cost . unfortunately , that is the situation as it is . will my right hon . friend join me in congratulating hatfield town cricket club in my constituency on its 150th anniversary ? at the recent anniversary celebration , many residents asked me about my commitment as their mp to reopening doncaster sheffield airport . will my right hon . friend confirm that the government will continue to work with me , mayor ros and doncaster city council and others to support progress with its reopening ? i thank my hon . friend , and i join him in congratulating hatfield town cricket club on its 150th anniversary . he has been a real leader on the issue of reopening doncaster sheffield airport , and i know that progress is being made . a 125 - year lease has been agreed , and i very much look forward to the progress that he and mayor ros will continue to make in once again getting planes flying over doncaster . this morning i attended environment , food and rural affairs questions , and i was surprised and somewhat confused to realise that only 40 minutes were allocated for them compared with the hour that is standard for other departments . why are this government following what i understand was the convention under the previous conservative government of restricting the time allocated for efra questions , considering that it is such an important department , covering everything from river pollution to farming support and the biodiversity crisis ? please would the leader of the house consider expanding the time allocated to efra questions to the full hour ? it is always a struggle to balance the demand and supply of oral questions on the floor of the house , and i know you share those concerns , mr speaker . we look at these things periodically , so i suggest that members enter the ballot for efra oral questions , because if demand is increased significantly , we would take that into account . demand in other departments is sometimes much higher . over the summer , many parents in my constituency were in touch with concerns about our local schools . of particular concern to parents of children at ark alexandra secondary is a new rule that children must leave their mobile phones at home . many parents support measures to reduce mobile phone use and social media use in school — they know how damaging it is — but they are really concerned about children having phones on the journey to and from school and the safety issues involved , and they want schools to look at options , such as lock boxes , which have been used successfully elsewhere . can the leader of the house advise me how in this house i can take forward that issue and the wider issue of improving our local schools ? order . i will try to call as many members as possible , but we are really going to have to be a bit quicker , otherwise other colleagues will not get in . i thank my hon . friend for that question . as the mum of teenagers , i know what an issue it is to balance the desires of parents to be able to contact their children and see where they are with their not wanting them to be on their phones all the time , especially while at school , which would be damaging to their education . schools are encouraged to consult parents on these issues to get that balance right . the issue of mobile phones for teenagers and children is a big one , so and if she puts in for a debate , i am sure she will get one . mr speaker , may i associate myself with your words of thanks to tricia hillas , who has given superb service to this house and who will always have the gratitude of the smith family , having baptised my sons charlie and rupert in 2022 . something else that happened in the previous parliament was the passage of my private member ’s bill — through to royal assent , with the support of the then opposition — on combating equipment theft from farms and other elements of rural crime . that act requires a statutory instrument to bring it fully into force . instead of having all these general debates , will the leader of the house bring that si forward ? the hon . gentleman will know that in many cases statutory instruments do not require time on the floor of the house , but as i have responsibility for triaging sis , i will look at the progress with that and let him know in due course . may we have a debate on the importance of investigative and public interest journalism ? the best journalists are an essential part of our democracy . i urge members to look at “ the long read ” by tom burgis in today ’s edition of the guardian , “ how oligarchs took on the uk fraud squad — and won ” . may i pay tribute to telegraph journalist david knowles , creator of the brilliant “ ukraine : the latest ” podcast , who tragically died last weekend at the age of only 32 ? i am sure my right hon . friend will join me in sending condolences to his family and friends . i congratulate my hon . friend on his election as a select committee chair . i certainly send my condolences to david ’s family . my hon . friend is absolutely right : investigative journalism is so important to our democracy and we should do whatever we can as a country to support it . i am sure that the culture secretary would be happy if he were to raise these matters with her in forthcoming oral questions . the chancellor of the exchequer offered assurances on i think the hon . gentleman has done that . i was going to say the same thing , mr speaker . i am sure the hon . gentleman has done that in raising the matter this morning . i will ensure that the transport secretary has heard that call and will ask for a transport minister to meet him urgently , as he was promised . first , may i pay tribute to a constituent of mine , jack hearn ? he turns 101 this week and is the uk ’s oldest judo teacher and also one of just five living veterans who fought at the battle of monte cassino in world war two . he is supported by forward assist , a local charity that helps veterans around the country . will the government make time for a debate on support for veterans ? i join my hon . friend in congratulating jack . i am sure that , as is often the case , around the time of remembrance day there will be ample time on the floor of the house to do what this government and many members will want to do : pay tribute to all those veterans who served this country so well over many years . i would like to draw the attention of the house to a recently passed anti - discrimination law in the philippines that is aimed at enhancing equality and protecting marginalised groups which has sparked a nationwide debate about the implications for religious freedom . the key question is : although the law seeks to prevent unfair treatment in employment , education and public services , how can the government ensure that religious freedoms are safeguarded , particularly given concerns raised by faith - based groups about potential conflicts with their beliefs on gender identity and sexual orientation ? will the leader of the house join me in questioning such persecution of religious freedom and will she urge the foreign , commonwealth and development office to raise this issue with its counterparts in the philippines ? i thank the hon . gentleman for once again raising the important issue of expression of freedom of religion or belief for all . i certainly will ask the foreign office to raise these issues about what is happening in the philippines . he will know that the government are committed to ensuring that there is freedom of religion and belief for all across the world . there have been a number of tragic road traffic accidents in my constituency in wickersley , anston , sitwell and whiston . i am meeting south yorkshire police to look at steps we can take to prevent these accidents from happening . can we have a debate on how agencies , local authorities and the police can work together to tackle speeding and boy racers in my constituency and across the country ? may i first congratulate my hon . friend on coming so high up in the private members ’ bills ballot ? i know that achievement will be the envy of many . my hon . friend raises an important matter about road traffic accidents and road safety . we will soon update the strategic framework for road safety , and i will ensure that is brought to the house as soon as it is ready . this month , bournemouth hosts the arts by the sea festival , the largest arts and culture celebration of its kind in the south - west . investments in the arts and culture and in community arts festivals have been crucial to revitalising our seaside towns by bringing visitors , supporting the local economy and nurturing a community of creatives . can i ask the leader of the house for a general debate in government time on how we invest and support the arts to help our cities and towns to develop ? i commend my hon . friend on her campaigning for an art gallery in her constituency and on all the campaigning she is doing to bring attention to bournemouth west and all that it has to offer . she is right that the creative sector and the creative economy are critical to regeneration and levelling up . this government fully support that agenda . in the town of dudley , the conservative - led council has proposed the introduction of parking charges . that will affect students from dudley college of technology , learning development , local businesses , traders , users of the leisure centre and my residents , who will struggle with the costs . will the leader of the house allow a debate in government time on how we support town centres and properly consider the potential negative impact on economic activity and community wellbeing caused by the hiking of parking charges ? as the member of parliament for manchester central , i am all too familiar with the challenges of parking charges in our towns and city centres . that is in part why we as a government are ensuring that we have better public transport , and in particular better buses , so that people have alternatives . i know that this issue creates a lot of interest , should my hon . friend wish to apply for a debate on parking charges . over the recess , i met the hubb foundation in stoke - on - trent , which has delivered yet another fantastic holiday activities and food programme over the summer . i have seen the impact of its work at first hand over many years , and it was a bittersweet moment when it handed out its 1 millionth meal a couple of weeks ago . will the leader of the house make time for a debate on the continuation of such programmes to alleviate child poverty in stoke - on - trent north and kidsgrove and across the country ? my hon . friend raises an important issue . the fact that in this country in 2024 we still need to operate food banks and holiday clubs to stop children from starving in the school holidays is frankly something that should bring us all shame . that is why we have a child poverty strategy . we will continue to support holiday clubs , such as the one he describes in stoke - on - trent north . i thank him for raising this important matter . the darzi report published earlier today clearly outlines the importance of prevention . one aspect of that is the provision of good - quality school meals and increasing the uptake of free school meals . may i request consideration of a debate on an opt - out free school meals scheme , perhaps on the basis of universal credit ? that is the second question in a row on food poverty and the importance of children getting access to healthy , hot , high - quality meals . my hon . friend raises an important issue about the uptake of free school meals and how they are delivered in schools , so that we do not have the stigma we have sometimes seen in the past . i am sure that if she put in for a debate on free school meals , she might find her bid successful . rose — order . a couple of members are standing who came in very late . i will not be taking their questions . our creaking water infrastructure is rarely out of the news , and just this week my constituents in shoreham had to endure burst sewage pipes . thanks to years of under - investment by our water companies , record amounts of sewage are being pumped into our rivers and seas . will the government make time for this important issue to be discussed ? the state of our waterways in this country is shocking , as is the decriminalised way in which our water companies have been run over many years . that is why the government have taken quick action to clamp down on the water companies . just last week , we introduced the water ( special measures ) bill , which will eventually find its way to the house . my hon . friend might want to take part in its second reading when it comes . digital access has become an increasingly essential part of everyday life . however , large parts of my constituency suffer from both slow speeds and digital dead zones , which has a massive impact on residents and businesses , particularly as more of my constituents are embracing flexible hybrid working . will my right hon . friend grant a debate on digital connectivity ? digital inclusion is critical to ensuring that the growth we want to see in our economy reaches every part and every community . my hon . friend raises an incredibly important matter , and i am sure that the secretary of state for science , innovation and technology will want to hear from her at oral questions in october . the house may be aware that holmfirth is one of the most cherished locations in yorkshire , nestled in the heart of the yorkshire pennines . the holmfirth food and drink festival offers a delightful family day out brimming with live music , delicious food and entertainment . this weekend , along with thousands of others , i will explore the stalls for local produce and enjoy the street performers . i welcome the £ 10 million that the west yorkshire combined authority and kirklees council are investing in the town , which will enhance the town centre , attracting more visitors to the town , its festivals and local shops , as well as to venues including the picturedrome . can we have a debate in government time on the importance of the rural economy in the government ’s growth agenda ? i thank my hon . friend for that question on holmfirth , where i recently went for a short staycation . what a beautiful yorkshire town it is . it is a lot more than its reputation as the location of “ last of the summer wine ” , which many will remember . my hon . friend raises an important point . the rural economy is being continuously raised as an issue for a debate , and i am sure that we will look into it . the grub hub in my constituency is supporting some of my most vulnerable constituents , offering not only vital food support but companionship and wraparound services to help people to move forward with their lives . will the leader of the house join me in commending that organisation for its fantastic work ? while its work is fantastic , i join colleagues in asking for a debate about how we ensure that there will no longer be any need for food banks in towns such as aldershot . it is a disgrace that towns such as aldershot still need food banks and that food poverty is still so prominent . that is a key issue for the government and part of the work of our cross - cutting taskforce on tackling child poverty . i will ensure that the house is updated on that taskforce ’s progress on an ongoing basis . recently , a lovely constituent of mine spoke to me about the serious drug shortages affecting creon 25000 , which he needs to treat his condition of pancreatic enzyme insufficiency . the drug is also used to treat people with cystic fibrosis and pancreatic cancer — a horrible cancer that killed my mum . joe is now petrified because he is running out of his tablets ; he is scared to eat and terrified about the pain he will be in . will the leader of the house provide a statement on the supply of creon 25000 and its alternative nutrizym , which is also in short supply ? access to appropriate drugs freely on the nhs continues to be raised with me and the health secretary , who was in his place as my hon . friend asked that question . i am sure that he will take that up ; i will write to him to ensure that he does . one third of the children in my constituency now live in poverty , and a recent report by shelter showed that an increase in homelessness and child poverty is affecting many parts of the country . will my right hon . friend find some government time for a debate on child poverty and its causes ? my hon . friend is absolutely right that child poverty , which is still too high and which blights us all , is a cross - cutting issue , and housing is a key part of it . that is why we have the cross - cutting taskforce looking at these issues and why , just this week , we introduced the renters ’ rights bill , which will look at the challenges of the private rented sector . the devastating impact of knife crime is of huge concern to my constituents in redditch and the villages . one constituent , self - defence instructor pete martin , who witnessed a friend being stabbed 12 times , has been working with local schools to educate young people on the dangers of carrying knives . will the leader of the house make space in government time for a debate on how we can support the work of people such as mr martin and reduce knife crime in our communities ? i welcome my hon . friend to his place , and it was a pleasure to visit him before the election . he is absolutely right , and tackling knife crime is a key part of our mission to have safer streets . just this week , the prime minister , along with campaigner idris elba , launched the coalition to tackle knife crime . last month , we launched a nationwide call to hand over zombie - style knives and machetes , ahead of such weapons being banned from our streets on small businesses , coffee shops and traders are the lifeblood of constituencies such as mine in peterborough and across the country . will the leader of the house join me in congratulating the federation of small businesses , which celebrates its 50th anniversary this sunday ? will she also make time in the house for us to debate the amazing contribution made by the 5.5 million small business owners in this country ? my hon . friend makes a really important point about the vital contribution of small independent shops to our high streets , including his in peterborough . let us be honest : the conservative party hollowed out high streets and town centres across the country . but this government will turn the tide and put that right . the altrincham minor injuries unit was relied on and appreciated by my constituents , but it has been closed since 2020 , and the trafford locality board recently recommended that it should never reopen . i am opposing that recommendation , shaped as it is by 14 years of conservative failure on our national health service . could we have a debate in government time about the importance of minor injuries units in alleviating pressures on a&e departments and in ensuring that our national health service can truly be a neighbourhood health service ? as the secretary of state for health is about to outline in his statement , the truly shocking state of our nhs after 14 years of under - investment and neglect is being laid bare . one of the key priorities he will shortly outline is to ensure that our services move from hospitals to communities , and minor injuries units such as that in altrincham would be important to that endeavour . antisocial behaviour is ruining lives . in my short time as the mp for leeds south west and morley , i have been inundated with residents ’ requests for help about persistent antisocial behaviour by neighbours and by repeat offenders in public spaces and parks . given that the previous government decimated the services available to councils and the police to deal with the issue , will my right hon . friend the leader of the house please grant an urgent debate in government time to get the police and councils the resources they need to deal with this persistent problem ? tackling antisocial behaviour is a top priority for this government , which is why we will get thousands more police and police community support officers on our streets , with neighbourhood policing roles back in action . it is also why we will bring in tough new powers and legislate to ensure that they are as effective as possible . residents in south norfolk are being let down badly by royal mail . those living in the poringland area are waiting weeks to receive urgent post , such as nhs letters , legal documents and birthday cards . can we have a debate in government time about the importance of royal mail connections in our rural areas to ensure that we get post delivered on time to the people who need it the most ? the universal service is vital to communities such as the one my hon . friend represents . that is why any changes to it will be a matter for the house to debate thoroughly and robustly , and i am sure my hon . friend will want to take part in any such debates . with permission , i would like to make a statement on lord darzi ’s investigation into the nhs . unlike the last holders of this office , this government will be honest about the problems the nhs faces and serious about fixing them . that is why i asked lord darzi , an eminent cancer surgeon who served both labour and conservative - led governments with distinction , to conduct an independent investigation into the state of our national health service . i am sure the whole house will want to join me in thanking him for producing this expert , comprehensive report , a copy of which i have placed in the libraries of both houses . i told lord darzi that we wanted hard truths , warts and all . his findings are raw , honest and breathtaking . he says : “ although i have worked in the nhs for more than 30 years , i have been shocked by what i have found ” . he has uncovered an enormous charge sheet , too long to list in this statement , so these are just a few : the nhs has not been able to meet its promises to treat patients on time for almost a decade ; patients have never been more dissatisfied with the service they receive ; waiting lists for mental health and community services have surged ; 50 years of progress on cardiovascular disease is going into reverse ; and cancer is more likely to be a death sentence for nhs patients than for patients in other countries . it is not just the sickness in the nhs that concerns lord darzi , but sickness in society . children are sicker today than a decade ago and adults are falling into ill health earlier in life . that is piling pressure on to the nhs and holding back our economy . those are some of the symptoms ; the report is equally damning on the causes . first , a decade of under - investment left the nhs 15 years behind the private sector on technology , with fewer diagnostic scanners per patient than almost every comparable country , including belgium , italy and greece , and in 2024 mental health patients are treated in victorian buildings with cockroach and mouse infestations , where 17 men are forced to share two showers . secondly , there was the disastrous 2012 top - down reorganisation overseen by lord lansley . lord darzi ’s assessment is damning : “ a calamity without international precedent … it took a ‘ scorched earth ’ approach to health reform ” . “ by 2015 … ministers were … putting in place ‘ workarounds and sticking plasters ’ to bypass the legislation ” . “ rather than liberating the nhs , as promised , the health and social care act 2012 imprisoned more than a million nhs staff in a broken system for the best part of a decade ” . “ the effects … are still felt to this day . ” just imagine if all the time , effort and billions of pounds wasted on dissolving and reconstituting management structures had instead been invested in services for patients — clearly , the nhs would not be in the mess it finds itself in today . thirdly , there was coronavirus . everyone can see the lasting damage caused by the pandemic , but until now we did not know that the pandemic hit the nhs harder than any other comparable healthcare system in the world . the nhs cancelled far more operations and routine care than anywhere else . as lord darzi writes : “ the pandemic ’s impact was magnified because the nhs had been seriously weakened in the decade preceding its onset . ” in other words , it is not just that the conservatives did not fix the roof while the sun was shining ; they doused the house in petrol and left the gas on , and covid just lit the match . that is why waiting lists have ballooned to 7.6 million today . [ interruption . ] if i were an opposition member , i would not complain about the diagnosis . i would take responsibility . fourthly — this sits firmly at opposition members ’ door , so they should sit and listen — there was the failure to reform . from 2019 onwards , the previous government oversaw a 17 % increase in the number of staff working in hospitals . did it lead to better outcomes for patients ? no . at great expense to the taxpayer , the nhs has instead seen a huge fall in productivity . we paid more , but got less — a deplorable waste of resources when so many parts of our health and care services were crying out for investment . as lord darzi has put it : “ british airways would n’t train more pilots without buying more planes . ” doctors and nurses are wasting their time trying to find beds for their patients and dealing with outdated it when they ought to be treating patients . too many people end up in hospital because they can not get the help that they need from a pharmacy , a gp or social care . the effective reforms of the last labour government , which drove better performance and better care for patients , have mostly been undone , and that is why patients can not get a gp appointment , an operation or even an ambulance when they need one today . that is what the conservatives did to take the nhs from the shortest waiting times and highest patient satisfaction in history to the broken nhs that we see today . lord darzi has given his diagnosis . now it is over to us to write the prescription , and we have three choices . the first is to continue the conservatives ’ neglect , and allow the nhs to collapse . that is the path on which they set the nhs , and the path that it is on today . or we could — as some of my critics on the left demand — pour ever - increasing amounts of money in without reform , wasting money that is not there and that working people can not afford to pay . that would be wasteful and irresponsible , so we will not take that path . this government are making a different choice : we choose recovery and reform . we are taking action today to deal with the immediate crisis by hiring 1,000 gps whom the conservatives had left without a job while patients were going without an appointment , and agreeing an offer to end the strikes that they allowed to cripple our health service . at the same time , we will introduce the fundamental reforms needed to secure the future of our nhs . earlier today , my right hon . friend the prime minister confirmed that the government would publish a 10 - year plan for change and modernisation , on the foundation of lord darzi ’s report . our plan will deliver the three big shifts needed to make our nhs fit for the future . the first is from analogue to digital , giving patients proper choice and control over their own healthcare , and finally realising the untapped potential of the nhs app . there will be fully digital patient records so that your surgeon can see the notes that your gp writes . by marrying our country ’s leading scientific minds with the care of more than 1.5 million nhs staff , we will put nhs patients at the front of the queue for cutting - edge medicines and treatments that we can only imagine today . secondly , there is the shift from hospital to community , turning our nhs into a neighbourhood as much as a national health service so that patients can get their tests and scans on their high streets and be cared for from the comfort of their own homes . that means bringing back the family doctor and building a national care service that can be there for us when we need it , able to meet the challenges of this century . thirdly , there is the shift from sickness to prevention , which means taking the decisions that the conservatives ducked to give our children a healthy , happy start in life . it means stopping the targeting of junk food ads at children , banning energy drinks for under-16s , reforming the nhs to catch illness earlier — starting by offering health checks in workplaces and on smartphones — and delivering the tobacco and vapes bill that the conservatives failed to pass , to tackle one of society ’s biggest killers . lord darzi ’s diagnosis is that the nhs is in a “ critical condition”—unless we perform major surgery , the patient will die — but he also finds that “ its vital signs are strong ” : an extraordinary depth of clinical talent , and a shared determination to improve care for patients . this is a public service , free at the point of use , so that whenever we fall ill we never have to worry about the bill . the nhs is broken , but it is not beaten . every person i have met in the nhs during my first two months as health and social care secretary is up for the challenge . it will take time , but this party — the party that created the nhs — has turned the nhs around before , and we will do it again . i commend this statement to the house . on a point of order , mr speaker . how long has the hon . member been here ? points of order come at the end — you can not intervene in the middle of these proceedings . i call the shadow secretary of state . thank you , mr speaker . i thank the secretary of state for advance notice of his statement . the nhs belongs to us all , and we all care about it , so let us stop the political posturing and talk constructively about its future . we all know that our healthcare system faces significant pressures , as do all health systems around the world . we are living longer , and with multiple and complex conditions . we have wider societal pressures , such as the impact of social media on the development of some young minds , as well as the cost pressures of miracle drugs developed by our world - class life sciences sector for their treatment benefits , and the shock of the pandemic has had catastrophic impacts on the nhs and its productivity . i believe there is much to be proud of in the nhs . its dedicated staff look after 1.6 million people a day — 25 % more people than in 2010 . it has more doctors , more nurses and more investment that at any point in its history . it is delivering tens of millions more out - patient appointments , diagnostic tests and procedures for patients than in 2010 , and we delivered the fastest roll - out of vaccinations for covid in the world , freeing our society more quickly than other countries . we have more healthcare in the community , with the opening of 160 community diagnostic centres — the largest central cash investment in mri and ct scanning capacity in the history of the nhs — and 15 new surgical hubs ; and the launch of pharmacy first , helping to free up 10 million gp appointments for those living with more complex conditions . [ interruption . ] i say to the secretary of state that i paid him the courtesy of listening to him in silence , so i hope he will do the same for me . i did n’t say anything ! the right hon . gentleman was chuntering from a sedentary position . we on the—[interruption . ] order . i want to hear the right hon . lady , and members ’ constituents want to know what is being said . please , let us give the same courtesies that i expected for the secretary of state . thank you , mr speaker . we on the conservative benches never pretended that everything was fixed . we have not pretended that we have a monopoly on wisdom or that there are easy answers to the difficult challenges we face . for the nhs to thrive in its next 75 years , it needs to reform , modernise and improve productivity . that is why the conservative government , working with nhs england , announced the nhs productivity plan at the spring budget to transform how the nhs works through better it systems for frontline staff , the expansion of services on the nhs app , which is used by three out of four adults in england , and the use of new technology , including voice - activated artificial intelligence . together , that would see productivity grow by 2 % a year by the end of the decade and unlock £ 35 billion - worth of savings , yet the plan is not mentioned in the 163 - page report . why is such an important and forward - looking reform missing from the report , and can the right hon . gentleman confirm that he is choosing to cancel it — yes or no ? new medicines and trials are an essential part of the productivity challenge . there is only one mention of the national institute for health and care excellence in the 163 - page report . do the government have a strategy for life sciences and the provision of rare medicines , including cancer and dementia drugs ? why have they paused the childhood cancer taskforce ? the need for reform was also why we implemented the first ever long - term workforce plan with nhs england to train even more doctors , nurses , midwives and other healthcare staff for the future . the plan was described by the nhs ceo amanda pritchard as “ one of the most seminal moments in our 75 - year history ” , yet it is not mentioned in today ’s report . again , why is such an important and forward - looking reform missing from the report ? is the right hon . gentleman going to cancel the new places and forms of training , including apprenticeships , that were to be provided through that plan ? the need to modernise is why , in 2019 , we announced the largest programme of hospital building in modern history : 40 new hospitals across england by 2030 [ interruption . ] i would be careful if i were some back - bench mps . today , seven new hospitals have opened , the midland metropolitan university hospital will open at the end of the year — i imagine the secretary of state will enjoy going to its launch — and a further 18 are in construction . we are not even halfway through the decade . since january 2023 , it has been labour ’s plan to pause , review , delay and , presumably , possibly cancel those new hospitals . that was when it published its health mission ; it is on page 6 for those who have not read it . in other words , it was always labour ’s plan to delay and possibly cancel the new hospitals , and it has nothing to do with the chancellor ’s questionable accounting since the general election . when that was pointed out in the general election campaign , labour candidates ran around promising voters that their new hospital or community diagnostic centre was safe with them — in torbay , chelsea and fulham , basingstoke , watford , bracknell , truro , corby and kettering to name a few . will the right hon . gentleman confirm that labour will delay those hospitals ? order . it is difficult , but the time limit is supposed to be five minutes , and it has now been six minutes 22 seconds , so we are well over . can you now conclude on that sentence ? thank you , mr speaker . there is one part of great britain where , on almost every measure , the nhs performs the worst : labour - run wales . the right hon . gentleman has compared — order . i am sorry ; i meant that you were to conclude now , not to continue with the rest of the speech . i call the secretary of state . the first word that the shadow secretary of state for health and social care should have said was “ sorry ” . she says that she never pretended everything was fixed , and that is true , but it is about time that she admitted that it was her party that broke the nhs in the first place . in fact , it has been a feature of debate in the house since the general election that the opposition have taken absolutely no responsibility for the mess they left our country in , including a £ 22 billion black hole and the new hospitals programme that the right hon . lady referred to , in which the timetables were a work of fiction and the money ran out in march . she knew that when she went to the country to claim that the programme was fully funded . she talks about the decisions made by nice ; that was a new labour reform and modernisation — one that thankfully survived the last 14 years . the right hon . lady has endorsed my predecessor does not bear responsibility for everything in the darzi report — this crisis was more than a decade in the making — but i wonder when the right hon . lady will show some humility on behalf of her party and apologise for the mess that her government made of our national health service . otherwise , why should anyone trust what the conservatives have to say ever again ? this government were given a mandate for change , and nowhere is that more needed than in our nhs . the report must mark the beginning of the long , hard work of change . it is the platform from which we will launch a decade of reform that will make sure that the nhs can be there for us when we need it — for us , our children and our grandchildren . it must draw a line in the sand , so that we never go back to the pain , fear and misery that the conservative party inflicted on millions of patients . rose — this statement will run for an hour , so please help each other . let us try clive efford as a good example . thank you , mr speaker . i will rise to the challenge . i welcome the secretary of state ’s statement . in 2008 , the previous labour government commissioned a report from sir michael marmot on the state of society and health , and he found that there was health inequality , particularly in deprived areas . ten years on , his second report found that health inequality had become even worse against the backdrop of an underfunded nhs . does that not demonstrate the urgency of the need to invest in those communities under this government ? what can my right hon . friend do to direct resources into the most deprived communities in order to turn around those health inequalities ? my hon . friend is absolutely right that our country has stark health inequalities . it is not right that people who live in different parts of the country have such different chances of living well . a girl born in blackpool can expect to live healthily until she is 54 , whereas a girl born in winchester can expect to live healthily until she is 66 . that is why , with the prime minister ’s mission - driven approach , we will not just get our nhs back on its feet and make sure it is fit for the future ; we will also reduce the cost and burden of demand on our national health service by attacking the social determinants of ill health . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . much of the content of lord darzi ’s report has been known for some years . none the less , today ’s report is a scathing summary of the complete devastation that the conservatives have wrought on our health services and on the health of our communities . we liberal democrats have long argued that we need to shift healthcare from hospitals to high streets , and from treatment to prevention , because doing so improves health outcomes and saves taxpayers ’ money . it is a win - win . but the report is long on diagnosis and short on prescription , so may i invite ministers to read our fully costed manifesto to fix public health and primary care by recruiting 8,000 gps , ending dental deserts , boosting public health grants by £ 1 billion , implementing our five - year plan to boost cancer survival rates , and putting a mental health expert in every school ? does the secretary of state accept that there is an elephant in the room : social care ? will he meet me to discuss the liberal democrat plans for social care , starting with free personal care ? this bold idea would prevent many people from going into hospital in the first place , as well as enabling them to be discharged from hospital faster . does he accept that it is a truth universally acknowledged that we can not fix the nhs if we do not fix social care too ? as for the dire state of our hospitals and primary care estate , well , the conservatives have left it to fester like a wound . will the secretary of state give the green light to hospitals that are ready to rebuild , such as mine in west hertfordshire ? will ministers look to reform outdated treasury rules that are preventing our integrated care boards and hospital trusts from spending and investing their funds in the gp practices and hospitals that we need ? this government say that they want growth . well , health and wealth are two sides of the same coin , which is something the conservatives do not understand . if labour wants economic growth , fixing our health and social care must be its top priority . and it must be a priority without delay . how refreshing to have constructive opposition in the chamber . it was clear throughout the election campaign that my party and the liberal democrats have much in common , both in the commitments we made , which in some cases were identical , and in our shared areas of emphasis : the link between health and wealth , the importance of prevention and the importance of social care . as the prime minister reiterated again this morning , we are absolutely determined to address both the short - term crisis and the long - term needs of the century in our social care system . we want to work on a cross - party basis wherever possible , so i would be delighted to meet the liberal democrat spokesperson . hundreds of thousands of operations , including dozens of my own lists , were cancelled because of the strikes in the nhs over the past two years . does the secretary of state agree that the conservatives ’ refusal to negotiate with the doctors contributed to the terrible state of the health service , and that ending the strikes is the first step towards fixing the nhs ? it sticks in the craw to hear the carping and criticism from the conservatives , and their obvious bitter resentment that we were able to do in three weeks what they failed to do in over a year . all the while they complain about the costs of solving the strikes , they say nothing about the costs they racked up — the direct financial costs of covering the strikes , as well as the untold costs of misery to patients whose operations , procedures and appointments were cancelled , even as the shadow secretary of state for health and social care and her ministers had not even bothered to meet the junior doctors since march this year . the conservatives have no grounds to complain . i thank those who daily work in nhs services across our country . if the secretary of state is truly serious about assisting and supporting the whole of our nhs in england , across all our constituencies , “ warts and all ” , as he says , will he explain thoroughly why the health outcomes and experiences of families across wales , over the last 25 years , do not merit this attention equally ? is it perhaps because wales is labour - run ? i have never denied , nor have the welsh government , that our health and social care systems are in crisis across the united kingdom , and that waiting times and patient outcomes are not where they should be . [ interruption . ] the conservatives do not wish to acknowledge the truth , and even now , without a shred of humility or acceptance of the responsibility of their record in government , they carp from the sidelines . they will not admit or accept that different parts of the united kingdom have different strengths and weaknesses . regardless of the fact that there is a scottish national party government in scotland or a unique arrangement in northern ireland , as well my friends in the welsh government , i am proud that in my first weekend as secretary of state for health and social care , i made it my business to phone my counterparts in scotland , wales and northern ireland . i made it clear that we will always work constructively , whatever our parties and however hard we will fight each other at the ballot box . rather than pointing fingers at other parts of the united kingdom , as the conservatives did when they were in government , this government are determined , just as the last labour government were , to create a rising tide that lifts all ships . i look forward to working with every devolved administration to improve health and care outcomes across the whole of our united kingdom . the secretary of state is right that the future of our nhs lies in reform , and not waiting until people get sick before we intervene to keep them well , but we can not do that without money . he says we can not waste money that is not there , but we are wasting money that is there on the contracts we have with the private sector . he knows i feel strongly about this issue . millions of pounds are being paid to private equity - backed funds to run sexual health centres in the nhs — the icare clinics . billions of pounds are being lost to the legal loan sharks of our nhs — the private finance initiative companies — and some trusts are spending more on pfi payments than on drugs . as part of the process , will he commit to an urgent review of the way in which the nhs has worked with the private sector , because reform must also include restructuring our debt ? my hon . friend has done a lot of work in this area and i would be delighted to meet her . let me give the conservative party a lesson in humility . however proud i am of the last labour government — and i am incredibly proud of what they did to our health estate , the investment they brought in , through a range of different types of private financing , and the impact that had ; i can see the benefits in my own constituency — i have never shied away from what we did not get right . at the same time as celebrating what we got right in government , we must reflect on what we did not get right and genuinely learn those lessons , which is what we did in opposition . it took us too long to get back into government — we will learn from that for the future — but it has been really interesting to listen to conservative members over the past nine weeks . they have not learned anything , they have not got the message and they are not going to change . as labour embarks on a reform programme , may i ask whether the secretary of state has read the report of the mid staffordshire public inquiry , which looked at the shocking patient neglect last time labour was in charge ? reading it might temper the hubris that he is showing in the chamber today , in the face of the challenges that his colleagues in wales have certainly not managed to overcome . i gently point the hon . gentleman to the bold claims made by the now shadow chancellor , pharmaceutical producers auden mckenzie and actavis uk charged excessive and unfair prices for hydrocortisone tablets . nhs spending on those products rocketed because producers gamed the system . how will my right hon . friend ensure that future procurement processes deter the rigging of drug prices ? my hon . friend makes a great point , and he has given great service to the public accounts committee of this house by drilling into waste , inefficiency and exploitation of the public purse . i want to work with the great life sciences sector and pharmaceutical industry in this country and globally , but in a spirit of genuine partnership . a really good working relationship requires social responsibility ; it certainly involves not ripping off the taxpayer . i welcome the report . the previous government left this government with nhs and care services in the worst crisis in their history . the secretary of state led by emphasising the decade of underinvestment ; that needs to be coupled with pointing out the very weak workforce planning . when he meets the liberal democrats , will he review our costed plan to raise the investment necessary to address the issues highlighted in the report and to strengthen workforce planning in order to deliver services ? fiscal policy is a matter for the chancellor . i know on which side my bread is buttered , so i will not write her budget or spending review now , but let me reassure the hon . gentleman that , notwithstanding the £ 22 billion black hole that the conservatives left in the public finances this year and the weak foundations of our economy that we have inherited , the chancellor knows as well as i do that it is investment and reform that will deliver results . it will take time — we can not reverse more than a decade of underinvestment in a single budget or even a single spending review — but at least we have a government able to face up to the hard choices and capable of making them . i very much welcome lord darzi ’s report , which exposes how our country was let down by the previous government . in my bassetlaw constituency , i will be asked when people who need a gp appointment will get one , and when the 2,000 - person dental waiting list will come to an end . i am listening to my gps and my dentists so that i can work with them to tackle this crisis . i will be meeting them shortly . what is the secretary of state ’s message to them all ? my hon . friend , who i am delighted to see representing bassetlaw , is already showing herself to be an outstanding champion for her community . she raises a really good challenge that we all face as constituency mps : the public recognise that change takes time and that we can not fix more than a decade of problems in the immediate future , but they want to know that at least we are hitting the ground running and getting the job done . i can reassure my hon . friend ’s constituents in bassetlaw that within our first couple of months , this government employed 1,000 more gps on the frontline who had been left unemployed by the previous conservative government . we did that pretty much immediately . we have settled — i hope ; we await the outcome of the ballot — the junior doctors ’ dispute , so we can remove the cost of disruption and industrial action and start work on getting the waiting lists down . we will be working at pace to deliver 40,000 more appointments every week so that we can cut waiting lists , and 700,000 urgent emergency dentistry appointments so that we can ensure that people get the care they need . every single promise in our manifesto , notwithstanding the challenges in the public finances , was a fully costed , fully funded promise that we will keep and that the country can afford . may i urge the secretary of state to learn from what is working well in the nhs , as well as from what has gone wrong ? in reference to the health and care act 2022 , paragraph 14 on page 121 of the report states : “ the result is that the basic structure of a headquarters , regions , and integrated care boards ( icbs ) is fit for purpose . ” i draw the secretary of state ’s attention to the suffolk and north east essex icb , which is one of the most successful in the country . can we learn from that success , and build it into other areas ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his constructive approach . the tragedy of the health and care act 2022 was that a large part of its focus was on trying to correct the enormous damage done by lord lansley through a top - down reorganisation that nobody wanted and that the country could not afford . that is why i have said very clearly that we will not repeat the mistakes of top - down reorganisation . with the architecture of the system , we will take an approach of evolution rather than counter - revolution . on the hon . gentleman ’s point about learning from what is working well in the nhs , what gives me great hope for the future of our national health service is that every day there are amazing people providing great - quality care , reforming , innovating and showing us what the future looks like . it is the responsibility of this government to take the best of the nhs to the rest of the nhs . that is exactly what we will do . lord darzi ’s report makes grim reading and lays bare the failure of the last government . nhs staff up and down the country will recognise everything in it . does the secretary of state agree that much more needs to be done on retaining , recruiting and compensating the nhs workforce and making sure that we have a workforce fit for the future ? for all the innovations that modern technology will bring — the revolution in big data ai , machine learning and medical advances that we will see very soon but can scarcely imagine today — health and social care will always be fundamentally a people - based service . if you do not value your people , you lose them and end up in the appalling situation that we are in today . we have invested so much money and time in training people who imagined a long future for themselves in the nhs but who , because of the reality to which they were subjected by the previous government , are now packing up and moving into different careers — or to other continents . we are determined not just to recruit the great staff we need , but to value and retain the brilliant staff we already have . the secretary of state will know that cancer is the biggest cause of death by illness for children under 14 in the uk , and that this is childhood cancer awareness month . he will not know that it is also the third anniversary of the death of my constituent sophie fairall , who was 10 years old . with sophie ’s mum charlotte , i have been campaigning for the past three years for the children and young people cancer taskforce to be set up . the taskforce was set up at the beginning of this year with the stated aim of meaningfully changing detection , treatment and care for children with cancer . i have listened carefully to the secretary of state and have heard him passionately set out that he wants to focus on prevention and early intervention , yet this month we learned that he is pausing the taskforce . parents of children with cancer are deeply disturbed by that announcement , as am i. can the secretary of state set out why it was made ? absolutely . i thank the hon . member for the way she put her question . i send my deepest condolences to sophie ’s family on what will inevitably be a difficult day — i suspect just the latest of many difficult days — on the imaginable pain , grief and loss that they have suffered . i thank the hon . member for her work over many years campaigning on children ’s cancer in this house on behalf of her constituents and so many other families affected by young cancer . the pause is because we are looking at the breadth of the work of the department to make sure that we have the right vehicles to deliver the outcomes that we want . that is why we have paused rather than cancelled , slammed or criticised the work that she was doing . i would be delighted to meet her to talk about the genesis of the taskforce and how we can take forward the outcomes that she wants to see . what we are trying to avoid is a plethora of taskforces , and the risk that there has sometimes been — this is not a party political point , because this spans successive governments — of taskforces being an alternative for action . i know that she wants action , so let us meet and see what we can do together . when i grew up in stretton under the last labour government , i could get an appointment with my family doctor the next day . after 14 years of the conservatives , stretton residents now often have to travel more than six miles to a gp surgery in another village just to get an appointment for which they have already waited weeks . does the secretary of state share my view that this is unacceptable , and that it falls to this government to fix the conservatives ’ mess ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . we need to make sure that we have the right staff in the right place and an equitable distribution of access to nhs services right across the country . we also want to shift from the hospital - centred nhs that we see today to a neighbourhood - centred service . that is why we have acted immediately to put 1,000 more gps on the frontline before the end of this year . i am looking forward to working with gps to expand access to primary care right across the country , especially in communities that are particularly under - served . this review highlights the need for capital investment in the nhs . the question that nhs staff and patients in north west norfolk have is urgent : are the government committed to replacing their hospital , which is affected by reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete , with a new queen elizabeth hospital in king ’s lynn by 2030 — yes or no ? i can absolutely reassure the hon . member that raac - impacted hospitals are a priority . we are putting safety first , and it is just a shame that when his residents had a prime minister in their backyard , the conservative government did not fix the problem . for the sake of openness and transparency , i will just mention that i am a former chair of an nhs trust and a public health academic . i recognise the real issues that are raised in the findings of the darzi rapid review . i am grateful to lord darzi for referring in particular to the inequalities that we have experienced , and how those inequalities were laid bare during covid . will the health and social care secretary expand on the cross - departmental work that he is doing ? i agree with my hon . friends the members for walthamstow ( ms creasy ) and for eltham and chislehurst ( clive efford ) that people ’s socioeconomic circumstances drive their health status . we do not want a situation where , for every 1 % increase in child poverty , six additional babies per 100,000 live births do not reach their first birthday . i thank my hon . friend for her question and congratulate her warmly on her election to the chair of the work and pensions committee . i am looking forward to sharing , through the secretary of state for work and pensions , the work that our departments are doing together , particularly on the link between mental health and unemployment and on integrating pathways . she is right about the social determinants of ill health . that is why i am genuinely excited that , through the mission - driven approach that the prime minister has set out , we are already bringing together whitehall departments , traditionally siloed , to work together on attacking those social determinants . the real game changer is genuine cross - departmental working , alongside business , civil society and all of us as active citizens , to mobilise the whole country in pursuit of that national mission , in which we will be tough on ill health , and tough on the causes of ill health , as someone might have said . i call the father of the house . i greatly respect the secretary of state , and , as an older person who relies on the nhs , i support his radical zeal . i repeat what he said in his statement : cancer is more likely to be a death sentence for nhs patients than for patients in other countries . we have had this conversation previously , but can he at least look at the health systems in other countries , particularly those in the netherlands , australia , france and germany ? those countries , which have wonderful health systems protecting the vulnerable , use a mixture of social insurance and public and private funds to maximise inputs into their health services . every time the right hon . gentleman praises my zeal for nhs reform , labour members get very nervous . let me reassure him that i have looked at other countries , and i will definitely continue to do that . i genuinely do not think that it is the model of funding that is the issue — the publicly funded , public service element . i hope that he knows me well enough to understand that if i did think so , i would be more than happy making , and would quite enjoy taking on , the argument , but i think that the equitable principle that underpins our nhs is one that we should cherish and protect . the single - payer model has enormous potential for the century of big data , ai , and machine learning . there is huge potential there that we must unlock , but that does not mean that we can not learn from the way that other countries organise care , particularly in the community and particularly social care . this week , i met virtually with my friend the health minister in singapore . i will continue to work with my international counterparts to learn from other countries whose health outcomes are far better than ours . in my constituency of north warwickshire and bedworth , patients wait far too long for gp appointments . the conservative party has presided over sticking - plaster solutions , papering over the cracks in our health service rather than making it fit for the future . does the secretary of state agree that today ’s report is a chance to get the right diagnosis of the problems , so that this new labour government can come up with the right prescription , and my constituents can once again get the treatment that they so desperately need ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend in her place . she is absolutely right . we will take lord darzi ’s diagnosis to write the prescription and ensure that our reform agenda benefits every part of the country — not just big cities and the wealthiest communities — so that every person , wherever they are from , grow up and live , has access to the very best health and care services . a key finding in the darzi report is that nhs staff morale is low . the medical defence union of medical practitioners stated recently that more than 44 % of nhs staff will reduce the number of hours that they work , because of low morale . will the secretary of state meet representatives of the union to explore those issues and work out ways of improving staff morale ? of course we seek to work constructively with all trade unions representing staff across our health and care services , and also with the royal colleges . we want to work in a spirit of partnership , and we are only able to do so because people sent labour mps to parliament to replace the conservatives . i agree with my right hon . friend : this is the most devastating analysis that i have read of the nhs in over 30 years . it just shows the challenges that lie before him . talking of challenges , will he challenge the integrated care boards to focus on moving resources into primary care ? in particular , will he look at what is happening in york , where nimbuscare has been able to pull out services from the acute sector and deliver work in the community ? i am really grateful to my hon . friend for her question . she has a huge amount of expertise in health and care , and she is absolutely right about the need for that shift . i have made it very clear to icb leaders and to trusts across the country that i want more focus on secondary prevention , which means much more activity in the neighbourhood . i know that she will keep on championing these causes . she is a good critical friend , and i know that she will hold my feet to the fire to ensure that i deliver . i declare my interest as the husband of an nhs doctor ; i also served as a non - executive director of my local nhs trust . the last time that lord darzi was brought into service was by a labour government , shortly before they appointed him to the house of lords . will the secretary of state take steps to ensure the widest possible input from senior clinicians ? it is clear that some , including professor sir john bell , do not share lord darzi ’s prescription for the improvement of the nhs . will he also apologise to my constituents for the doubt that he has cast over the future of the new hillingdon hospital , on which work had already started under the previous government ? i am not sure that is a fair characterisation of sir john bell ’s position . i have a huge amount of respect for him . i am grateful to lord darzi for writing the diagnosis . given that the conservative party was in government for 14 years , repeatedly promised to rebuild hillingdon hospital and left my department in a position where the money for the new hospitals programme ran out in march , the hon . member has some brass neck to point the finger at us while he is in opposition . in 2016 , the horton hospital in my constituency lost its consultant - led maternity unit — a temporary downgrade that ended up being made permanent three years later . is it not about time that someone from the conservative party apologised for the damage done to banbury ’s hospital , as well as to the nhs as a whole ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend here . his constituents can already see that he is not backwards in coming forwards . he will stand up and champion their interests in this house as a great constituency mp . when it comes to the conservative party , sorry seems to be the hardest word . i welcome the announcement of the secretary of state about the shift from hospital to community care . my fellow liberal democrats and i fully believe that fixing social care is part of the solution in getting the nhs back on its feet , so i also welcome the announcement of a national care service . part of care in the community is of course the hospice sector . i recently met the chief executive of st catherine ’s hospice , which is in the constituency of i am so grateful for that question , not least because it gives me the chance as a constituency mp to say a huge thank you to st francis hospice and haven house children ’s hospice for the care they provide to constituents , like so many other hospices around the country . i know that the sector is under real pressure . we look forward to working with the sector throughout the period of the spending review and the 10 - year plan , not only to support our hospices but to improve end - of - life care , which is pertinent to debates that i know this house and the other place will have about how we ensure a good death for everyone , in every part of the country . on tuesday , i was at the birmingham children ’s hospital . will the secretary of state join me in congratulating the excellent staff on their work and their commitment to each individual patient who goes through the door ? that evening , i was also with a local gp at sparkbrook health centre , dr abid bhatti , whose frustration was with the outdated computer system . if he could get one message across to the secretary of state , it would be that he has to reboot his computer numerous times a day . will the secretary of state put resources in to ensure that the it is up to date ? first , my hon . friend is right that we should celebrate and thank staff who are doing an outstanding job against a very difficult set of circumstances . on his second point , we have to ensure that , on the tech side , we unlock productivity in the system . having literally sat looking over the shoulder of gps at their it systems , i well understand those frustrations . for the benefit of all observers , there is sometimes a perception that i am up against nhs staff when it comes to reform . actually , it is staff who are crying out for change . one aim of the lansley reforms was to transfer from ministers to clinicians decisions on the day - to - day running of the health service . it is not clear from his statement whether the secretary of state intends to change that process , but let me give him a constructive proposal that he might take on board , which is to streamline the business planning side of the nhs . staff have to go through multiple bids and preparations of business plans before decisions are made . that means that more money is spent on employing business consultants than consultants in hospitals . i have campaigned for this change for many years . will he take that on board ? [ interruption . ] the minister for secondary care was whispering in my ear that it was her frustration with exactly the bureaucratic processes that the hon . gentleman describes that led to her seeking election as a member of parliament to sort them out , so i defer to her on this one . on a serious note , he is right that wherever we find waste and inefficiency designed in , we must deal with it . i want to see an nhs that is more clinically led , free from political interference . we must also be honest : as it is such an enormous part of the public sector , which the public pay an enormous price for and value so much , there will always need to be an accountability relationship . what i have tried to build with nhs england in the last couple of months , with real joy in the process , is a real team between the department of health and social care and nhs england , as well as the team across the country . i look forward to continuing to galvanise that team as we embark on the 10 - year plan process . in my constituency , a staggering 28 % of patients said that it was “ not easy at all ” to get through to someone at their gp practice . worse , the figure for patients who said that doing this was “ generally easy ” was far below the national average . does the secretary of state agree that the conservatives have pushed the nhs to breaking point , and only this government can get the nhs fit for the future ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend in her place , standing up for her communities in penistone and stocksbridge . in opposition , it was very frustrating watching successive ministers promise better hold music for people trying to get through to their gp , rather than solving the problems of access . fixing general practice , and building general practice so that it can meet the needs of this century , will be a vital part of our 10 - year plan process . may i make the secretary of state a little more nervous ? the darzi report makes seven high - level recommendations , the fourth of which is to drive productivity in hospitals . from 2017 , in south essex we saw a merger of basildon , chelmsford and southend hospitals to create the mid and south essex nhs hospital trust . it has not been an unmitigated success . as local mps , we were promised significant back office savings that could be channelled into patient care . in fact , the reverse has been true , and there has been such a turnover of senior managers in that trust in recent years it has been like a game of musical chairs . the trust is now trying to appoint three permanent managers and directors for each hospital to provide stability , which makes sense , but is offering a salary of £ 200,000 for each post , which is more than the prime minister earns to run the country . now that this is on his watch , will the secretary of state take a personal interest ? we should pay a good rate for that job , but £ 200,000 sends the wrong signals to all the other very hard - working people in the trust . i thank the right hon . gentleman for that question . he is not too far away from me geographically , but he is miles away from me politically , and i always get nervous when he stands up to praise me . we have to keep a sharp eye on value for money . the darzi report presents some politically challenging messages about nhs management . i could be wildly popular with the country if i stood up and said , “ i ’m going to take the axe to management across the country and sack loads of managers . ” what we need is better management and a sharp eye on value for money . the nhs would not work without good leadership . we have to ensure that we have the right people in the right place , delivering against the public ’s expectations , so it is a more nuanced position , but i am sure that what he says will have been heard by his local trust . i will certainly keep an eye on value for money across the country . the darzi report rightly says that prevention is better than cure , and that public health interventions that protect health are far less costly than tackling the consequences of illness and ill health . does my right hon . friend agree that the recklessness and incompetence of the 14 years of conservative government , stripping millions of pounds from local authorities , which deliver the public health work , has contributed to children being sicker than they were 10 years ago , and adults getting iller sooner ? my hon . friend is right , and at some point the conservatives will have to take responsibility for it . we learned through bitter experience that if we did not change as a party , the country would not choose to change the government . long may the conservatives continue , therefore , with their head in the sand , and long may we continue to get on with the job of clearing up their mess and building an nhs that is fit for the future . the relationship between the nhs and local government , and between my department and local government , is of particular importance in relation to social care , which is why i was especially delighted that the prime minister chose this week to appoint tom riordan , the chief executive of leeds city council , as second permanent secretary . he is an outstanding public servant with a demonstrable record on health and care integration , public health and prevention . i look forward to having that local government perspective , and local community delivery perspective , at the heart of our department . i think the whole house agrees with what the secretary of state said in his statement : the nhs needs reform . in reality , when i speak to people in the nhs , almost all of them say that this is not about a shortage of money , but about the legendary levels of waste , bureaucracy and mismanagement . indeed , the report refers specifically to the huge number of regulators , accountants and bureaucrats from the top down . is there recognition among the nhs senior leadership that management reform is a critical part of improving healthcare in the united kingdom ? i welcome the hon . member to his place and thank him for that question . i am always cynical about huge volumes of regulation . we reassure ourselves as legislators and regulators that putting regulations in place means that we have dealt with the issue . but the problem is that if we fail to deliver , we put another regulation in place , then another , and then more , and before we know it , we have drowned the people responsible for delivery in so much regulation that they can not sort the wheat from the chaff or see the wood for the trees , compromising standards and patient safety . that is why i welcome the work that penny dash has done in relation to the care quality commission , and we will continue to work with her to reduce the burden of regulation , focus on the things that really matter and free nhs staff from red tape . i hope that he finds that reassuring . i plead with him not to send his party leader to agree with me as well , or i really will be in trouble . i declare an interest as the mother of an nhs nurse . it is important that we remember what is at the centre of this issue : people . three individuals came to my carlisle surgery last week because they were at the end of their tether about the care that their loved ones had received , or not received , at our local hospital . one is the husband of a woman who has profound physical disabilities and can not leave the house unaccompanied . she now has no trust in her local hospital because , among other things , her recent care involved her being fed food that she was known to be allergic to . i also saw the parents of a young woman who has epilepsy , a physical disability and profound anxiety . the failure to put in place a care plan to account for all that means that she is now self - harming . the other case was that of an elderly woman whose husband was discharged from the hospital without her consent . he is now in a care home 20 miles away , and she can not visit him . will the secretary of state assure those people that this government will not only fix our nhs , but restore their broken trust in it ? i am so grateful to my hon . friend . i enjoyed visiting her carlisle constituency ahead of the general election campaign , and i look forward to working with her to improve health services there and across the north - west , especially in the rural and coastal communities that rely on the hospital in carlisle , as well as on more local neighbourhood services . i must warn new members that one of the most depressing things about the last nine years has been constituency advice surgeries , where people would come to see us about the consequences of the failure of government and the failure of this place . we owe it to them to do better — better integration of health and care services , better access and outcomes , and better joined - up care . as she has painfully described , if we do not tackle the problems early , they become multiple , higher - cost and personal tragedies . we have seen enough of that . famously , the house has not seen an impact assessment of the withdrawal of the winter fuel allowance from frail 85 and 90 - year - olds on low incomes . has lord darzi or the secretary of state seen an assessment of the impact of that decision on nhs bed capacity over the coming winter ? the hon . member is an experienced member of this house , as both a former chair of the treasury committee and a former treasury minister , so she knows how impact assessments are done at the treasury . she knows that impact assessments of all the chancellor ’s fiscal decisions at the budget and the spending review will be published at that time . she also knows , i suspect , that despite the withdrawal of the winter fuel allowance from some pensioners — it will be targeted at those most in need — they will still be better off because the government have committed to maintaining the triple lock and to extending the warm home discount scheme and the available hardship support , so that pensioners are not left behind as we clean up the £ 22 billion mess that the conservatives left behind . lord darzi ’s report lays bare the scale of the challenges that our nhs faces . does the secretary of state share my deep concern that because of the conservative party ’s dismal record , the progress made by the previous labour government on heart disease and stroke — of which i have had recent personal experience — is now in reverse ? the number of people in england dying from cardiovascular disease before the age of 75 has risen to its highest level in 14 years . i am delighted to see my hon . friend in the house representing my old east end stomping ground . i wish her and her husband well in his recovery , and for their recovery , as a family , from his experience . let me reassure her that , when it comes to the future of health and social care , we will clean up the mess that the conservatives made . that will take time . the reverse in the progress made on cardiovascular disease , and the early warning signs of an uptick in smoking , are why we must put public health and prevention at the forefront . that is not just about what is good for the individual , their health and their chances ; look at what the office for budget responsibility says today about the long - term cost to the exchequer . we have no choice but to act . a key conclusion of the report is the absolute necessity of focusing on productivity and not just throwing money at the nhs ; i think we all agree on that . ministers are constantly telling us that government is about making difficult decisions — something that that we already knew . why , then , on one of his first opportunities , did the secretary of state do the absolute opposite of that ? in solving the doctors dispute , he took the easy option of throwing money at it , and did not require productivity enhancements and changes . will he reassure me that in future he will practise what he preaches ? i like the hon . gentleman very much , but what audacity to criticise this government for cleaning up the conservatives ’ mess . he fails to acknowledge the cost to the exchequer and to patients in delayed and cancelled operations , appointments and procedures . more than £ 1 billion has been lost and more than 1 million appointments cancelled because of the conservatives ’ gross incompetence and failure to understand the difference — they are penny - wise and pound - foolish . that is why they have been sent into opposition and labour has been trusted to clean up their mess . there can be no greater example of the previous government ’s failure than the shocking outcomes for our children and young people , as lord darzi ’s report highlights . our children now have some of the worst health outcomes in europe , with higher rates of obesity , diabetes and asthma , and poor oral and mental health . from head to toe , they have been failed . will the secretary of state ensure that the government ’s long - term plan for our nhs will give young people ’s health the priority that it deserves ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend in her place . she might be from the wrong side of the river , but she is absolutely right about the importance of prioritising children ’s health . as the prime minister said this morning , it is shocking that the no . 1 cause of hospital admission among children aged between six and 10 is tooth decay . i was criticised by the shadow secretary of state , who said that i called our children “ short and fat ” ; she is more outraged by my calling out the scourge of childhood obesity that her government fuelled than she is by the scourge of child obesity itself . that is why we will act and why the conservatives failed . i welcome the fact that the health secretary talks about a shift from hospital to community care ; that builds on lord darzi ’s finding that 13 % of beds are occupied by people who are waiting for care in more appropriate settings . caring for patients in community hospitals is much more cost - effective than caring for patients in big acute hospitals like the royal devon and exeter hospital where i live . what thought has the secretary of state given to the use of community hospitals that have lost beds in the last decade , such as seaton , axminster , honiton and ottery st mary ? the hon . gentleman is absolutely right about the value of community hospitals , step - down accommodation and care close to people ’s homes — or , better still , wherever possible , in their homes , so long as it is clinically safe and the right support and care is available . the shift from hospital to community will be at the heart of our 10 - year plan for reform and modernisation . like lots of his colleagues on the liberal democrat benches and lots of those on the government benches behind me , the hon . gentleman has already done a good job of putting his local lobbying of ministers on the record in the house . rose — order . i am aiming to end this statement at 1 pm . i remind members that anyone who was not in for the start of the statement will not be called . a recent survey of staff at east kent hospitals university nhs foundation trust showed that less than half of employees would be happy for their loved ones to be treated at an east kent hospital . that is a devastating verdict from staff , showing the impact on their morale and on confidence in the community for the care that people need . does the secretary of state agree , however , that a broken nhs is not the fault of staff like them , but down to the previous government ’s decade of austerity and top - down reorganisation of the nhs ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend in her place . she is absolutely right . i feel really sorry for nhs staff for what they have been put through over more than a decade of mismanagement and political incompetence , and we will work with them to clean up the mess . she establishes exactly the right test , which is whether we would want our loved ones to be treated in our local health and care services , and whether we would have confidence that , in every case , on every occasion and in every interaction , they would have access to the best - quality care . the truth is that we do not have that certainty , and too often it feels like chance . that is why we will always put the patient voice , the patient interest and the patient experience at the heart of our reform and modernisation programme . i thank the secretary of state for the honesty in his statement , and for his contact with the regional minister responsible at the northern ireland assembly . those are the first actions of a secretary of state who , i suggest , does not run away from issues but takes them head on . i congratulate him on that . i appreciate the terminology used in the report , which outlines the seriousness of conditions in the nhs but also highlights the fact that the vital signs are still strong . will the secretary of state outline how he intends to address the fact that the nhs in devolved regions is in an arguably worse condition ? will he confirm that the review will incorporate northern ireland and will he ensure that the findings , new practices and standards will be in place for northern ireland , along with increased funding in a new funding formula ? i thank the hon . gentleman for what he said ; coming from him , that means a great deal to me . i reassure him that i am committed to working with ministers in all devolved administrations to improve health outcomes for everyone in every part of our united kingdom . i know that the system is particularly pressed in northern ireland and i will do whatever i can , working with ministers in northern ireland , to help that situation and create the rising tide that lifts all ships right across the uk . i truly learned to appreciate the nhs when i became a parent and saw the care given to my family and children . it therefore horrified me , having sat in a&e with an ill child , to see in lord darzi ’s report that 100,000 infants waited for over six hours in a&e last year . does the secretary of state agree that that is a shocking state in which to leave the nhs ? will he commit to bringing the numbers down and making sure that parents do not have to endure that terrible wait ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend representing calder valley . he has captured the fear and anxiety about the length of the wait experienced by far too many parents when they access a&e departments . it is a terrifying experience , particularly for parents with small children , to be in that situation . frankly , the lack of focus on paediatric waiting lists and waiting times , whether in a&e or for electives , really is shameful . we have got to put children first and that is exactly what this government will do . my constituents in bournemouth west have faced rising nhs waiting times ; we have gp surgeries closing despite rising populations and health burdens ; there are no dentists accepting any nhs adult patients and residents are being told to go to southampton ; and the junior doctors and nurses i meet are devastated that they can not deliver the quality of service that they want to . does the secretary of state agree that although the road ahead is long , lord darzi ’s frank and raw assessment is the first step to recovery under a labour government ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend in her place representing the people of bournemouth . the great thing about where we are at this moment is that , for the first time in a long time , there is a feeling of hope and optimism about what the future could be . we are determined to build on that and give staff and patients the confidence of knowing that the best days for the nhs lie ahead . lord darzi ’s report highlights the use of capital expenditure to cover in - year spending by successive tory governments . money intended for long - term investment has been redirected over and over , and that has exacerbated the extremely serious and urgent problems that the secretary of state so rightly raises today . does he agree that that has stopped us making progress on capital projects that would enable big productivity improvements and improve access to care for all , particularly those in my constituency of leyton and wanstead ? i am delighted to see my parliamentary neighbour in his place ; he has big shoes to fill and he will certainly do that . the chancellor and i are determined to break the vicious cycle in which ballooning costs and overspends in day - to - day spending see raids on capital and tech budgets to fund the shortfall . the £ 22 billion black hole that we have inherited is a direct example of exactly where conservative short - termism leads . that is why , in respect of the spending review , i assure my hon . friend that productivity , tech and capital will be my focus in my representations to the chancellor and in the work we will do together to fix the mess that the conservatives left behind . rose — order . i ask members to help each other with one or two - sentence questions . to return to a subject close to the secretary of state ’s heart , does he agree that people ’s actual experience is how we will measure whether the nhs has been improved ? one of my children ’s grandparents , who was diagnosed under a labour government , had 12 great years of cutting - edge treatments and 12 years with their grandchildren . their grandfather , who was diagnosed under a conservative government , had 12 weeks . i am grateful to my hon . friend for the work she does championing milton keynes . therein lies the challenge : it can not be right that delays in diagnosis lead to the difference between life and death . i am very lucky that my cancer was caught early . it was diagnosed quickly and treated quickly . not everyone is fortunate , and i am so sorry that my hon . friend ’s family is bearing the consequences of what happens when things go wrong . despite the damning analysis of the state in which the conservatives left the nhs , lord darzi says that its vital signs remain strong . does the secretary of state agree with the case for the health service being taxpayer funded , free at the point of use , and based on need and not the ability to pay ? i am delighted to see my hon . friend from dudley . i agree wholeheartedly , 100 % , unequivocally . in a recent conversation , a nurse in brunswick village in my constituency shared her damning experience of the increasing number of black alerts in her hospital . does the secretary of state agree that , although her experience is no surprise to many who have used the nhs recently , the tories have pushed our nhs to the brink and it is up to labour to fix it and make it fit for the future ? absolutely . the amazing nhs staff in my constituency work tirelessly , day in and day out , in our local hospitals and surgeries . will my right hon . friend join me in thanking them , and will he be clear that lord darzi ’s shocking findings are not on them , but on the appalling legacy of the conservatives , who still have not apologised ? nhs staff did not break the nhs — the conservatives did — and this labour government will mobilise them to help fix it . it was great to see the prime minister speaking this morning at the king ’s fund , where i worked as director of policy for a number of years . in my constituency , i met a man who had been told he needed urgent surgery on his leg , but was still waiting 18 months later and had had to give up work . it is clear from today ’s report that too many people have been stuck on nhs waiting lists and locked out of work . does the secretary of state share my view that a healthy nation is critical to a healthy economy , and will he work with his colleagues in the department for work and pensions to deliver that ? my hon . friend is absolutely right : the health of the nation and the health of the economy are inextricably linked . under this government , the department of health and social care is a department for growth as well as a department for health and care , and the chancellor understands those linkages too . i can say to my hon . friend and all of her friends at the king ’s fund — we were delighted to see them host the prime minister this morning — that unlike our predecessors , this government can not get enough of experts . that concludes the statement . we have had more than 45 contributions from back benchers , so i thank you for your patience . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . we are all passionate about our hospices , our hospitals , our gp practices and the other health services that our constituents get . coming to this place is not for the faint - hearted , but is it appropriate for the secretary of state for health and social care to adopt the tone that he brought to the chamber earlier ? as i say , we are all passionate , but perhaps his tone — his bedside manner , may i say — needs a new approach on occasion . i noted his more collegial tone later in the statement , but to tell opposition hon . members — we are all hon . members in this place — to sit down and listen , or to liken some previous holders of his role to arsonists and similar paraphernalia , is not befitting of this chamber . further to that point of order , madam deputy speaker . i like the hon . lady very much , and i will just say two things in response : first , she has been around in this chamber a long time . conservative members can not sit and heckle , then get cross when ministers respond robustly . secondly , i think that was a perfectly legitimate analogy ; indeed , i might say that the arsonists should not complain about the fire brigade . i remind all hon . members that good temper and moderation are the characteristics of a good debate . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . you will recall that i have raised in the house the use of crossbows by criminals . these are lethal weapons . the previous government added to the list of weapons that are banned , and the current government are implementing those measures . have you had any notice of a statement being brought to the house by ministers to respond to the increasingly pressing cries from those who want to see crossbows added to that list of banned weapons ? i thank sir john for his point of order . it is not a matter for the chair , but i can clarify that we have not had notice of a statement . presentation and first reading ( secretary yvette cooper , supported by the prime minister , pat mcfadden , secretary ian murray , secretary jo stevens , lucy powell and dan jarvis , presented a bill to require persons with control of certain premises or events to take steps to reduce the vulnerability of the premises or event to , and the risk of physical harm to individuals arising from , acts of terrorism ; to confer related functions on the security industry authority ; to limit the disclosure of information about licensed premises that is likely to be useful to a person committing or preparing an act of terrorism ; and for connected purposes . bill read the first time ; to be read a second time motion made , and question proposed , that this house has considered matters to be raised before the forthcoming adjournment.—(christian wakeford . ) i am honoured to open this debate in the memory of our great friend — my great friend — sir david amess , a fallen comrade whose plaque i am looking at right now . it is on the other side of the chamber , just above where he used to sit ; appropriately enough , it is directly opposite that of jo cox , another fallen comrade who graced this house while she was here . as there are a number of new members in the chamber , maybe nervously waiting to make their maiden speech — i remember that feeling , too — perhaps i could explain why we call this debate the sir david amess debate . it is not just in honour of his service , but because he was a past master at making use of it . in essence , david would manage to cram a vast number of different topics , usually related to his constituency , into a very small amount of time . from memory , the all - time record was 20 different subjects in 12 minutes , each of which mysteriously led to a subsequent press release . he basically turned it into an art form , and as a result , the end - of - term adjournment debate was always known in the commons tea room as the sir david amess debate . as such , after his loss , mr speaker and the house authorities decided to turn that from de facto to de jure , and formalised it by giving the debate his name . i am delighted that we have done so , because it helps to keep his name alive . [ hon . members : “ hear , hear . ” ] will the right hon . gentleman give way ? yes , of course — even on the adjournment . i commend the right hon . gentleman on the speech he is making . every one of us who had the pleasure of knowing sir david amess can picture him over on the far side of the chamber . he was able to rattle off about 30 things at some speed , every one of them pertinent to his constituency , but he did it with a grace and respect that we all loved , and we miss him dearly . is it the right hon . gentleman ’s intention to do the same—30 items in about 12 minutes ? no , i can reassure the hon . gentleman and the house that i only intend to raise three topics . before my right hon . friend leaves the subject of sir david , whom i first met in the 1970s — in a different place , and when i was briefly in a different party — i ask him to confirm my recollection : that in all those many years , i can not think of a single occasion when david said a mean , unkind or unfair thing about anyone . there are not many people about whom one can say that , and i for one regard him as an inspiration . i generally agree with my right hon . friend , particularly about defence matters , and he has summed my great friend up very well . at the end of my speech , however , i will make a small revelation about david and the 1983 general election , which i hope colleagues will find amusing . of course , david amess was a famous back bencher — he spent his career in this place entirely on the back benches . during the 19 years that i was on the front bench , i tried to do all kinds of things , but i am absolutely certain that david amess achieved far more than i ever did speaking from the back benches . that tells a story of its own : as david illustrated , it is perfectly possible to make a huge difference from all parts of this house , not only to one ’s constituents but to this place . i think my right hon . friend is being too modest about his own achievements . that is probably true . i hope hansard got that ! i want to raise three specific topics . the first is animal welfare ; the second is local nhs services , perhaps in a non - partisan way ; and the third and final is the story about the election . to turn to animal welfare first , david was an absolutely renowned animal lover . he frequently raised a number of animal welfare issues in this house and campaigned for them passionately , including by forming alliances with people on the other side of the aisle , as they would say in congress . specifically , he was a patron of the conservative animal welfare foundation , a wonderful organisation run by two brilliant people , christopher and lorraine platt . it has actively campaigned for a number of years on animal welfare issues such as increasing penalties for animal cruelty , seeking to ban imports of hunting trophies and ending the cruel use of farrowing crates for sows and piglets . it has succeeded with one of those — two more to go . david was also a serial entrant to the westminster dog of the year competition . every year he would faithfully enter his dog , and every year he would come back to his office full of faux outrage about the fact that , for some inexplicable reason , his dog had not been awarded the prize . my office was around the corner on the same corridor , and we always knew to hide when david was coming back from the competition , except that in his final year he entered his french pug named vivienne . she was named , incidentally , after julia roberts ’s character in “ pretty woman ” . only my mate could name a pet after a lady who earned her money in that way . when david put vivienne in , he was asked by a local journalist , “ why should members of the public vote for vivienne rather than one of the other dogs ? ” his answer was , “ because vivienne wants southend to become a city . ” he won twice : after he was murdered , southend did become a city , so we like to think he won in the end , and on a wave of public sympathy , vivienne was indeed voted the westminster dog of the year . my great friend i am delighted to tell the house that i am very honoured to have been asked to become a patron of the conservative animal welfare foundation , a duty i have proudly taken up this week , partly in david ’s memory . i will attempt to match his legacy in campaigning for animal welfare , and i am deeply indebted to the conservative animal welfare foundation for giving me that opportunity . secondly , david always had a strong interest in the national health service . he served for many years as a senior member of the health committee of this house . i declare an interest at this stage , as i am proud to say that my wife olivia works as a senior neuroradiographer in the nhs and has done for many years . i am very proud of what she and all the other staff of the national health service achieve for us day in and day out . i had the privilege of going on a ride - out with the east of england ambulance service a few weeks ago . i was accompanied by a senior paramedic named emily , who showed me the ambulance service in action . we were in an emergency response vehicle , and i was immensely impressed not just by her professionalism , but by her empathy with the people with whom she came into contact — an absolute professional . i am pleased to report that , while the east of england ambulance service has been through a turbulent time — it was in special measures for a while — it came out of special measures under the leadership of its previous chief executive , tom abell . whereas before there were often a dozen ambulances in the car park early on a thursday evening , when we went to southend hospital as part of my ride - out , there were only three . however , there is an issue at southend because the a&e unit is , shall we say , not very well designed . there is a very narrow entrance to it , such that if there is a trolley in the corridor , it is very difficult to get people in and out . so i am pleased to report that the hospital trust has secured £ 8 million of capital to completely rebuild a&e with a proper , purpose - designed entrance that ambulances can back into and discharge their patients from more quickly . the first phase of that will , i hope , open prior to christmas , and it will also be possible to expand capacity in a&e and to treat more patients more quickly . that was something david and his successor , anna firth , campaigned for very hard , and he would be pleased to know that . i campaigned some years ago to expand primary care in my constituency . i helped to get an expansion of audley mills surgery in rayleigh , and i have been involved in campaigns to expand two others : the riverside medical centre in hullbridge and the jones family practice in hockley . as it happens , tom abell has now taken over as the chief executive of the new mid and south essex integrated care board , and i had a meeting with him about these surgeries only a week or so ago . i am pleased to report to the house that it was a very positive meeting , and i am therefore hopeful that we will be able to secure those expansions . i did say that i would tell the house about the 1983 general election , but i am not sure whether what i am about to reveal has previously been in the public domain . for context , in 1979 basildon was one of the largest constituencies in the country , so in the early 1980s the boundary review basically divided it in two along the a127 arterial road . david never liked the term “ safe seat ” , because he felt it implied that one took one ’s constituents for granted , which he palpably never did . however , the pundits said that a safe tory seat had been created around billericay to the north of the a127 and a safe labour seat had been created in basildon new town , so at the time it was regarded as a one - all draw . but a tory sacrificial lamb still had to come along and fight this seat , so along came david amess . he had fought a newham seat at the 1979 general election in his late 20s , and at age 31 he became the conservative candidate for basildon . the campaign did not get off to an auspicious start . in those days , electoral law required that prospective candidates should have a formal meeting at which they would be legally adopted by their party . david ’s local association had hired the northlands community centre in pitsea to have the meeting . unfortunately , there had been a miscommunication , and when they arrived the place was padlocked up . there were no mobile phones in those days , so a colleague was immediately dispatched to a nearby telephone box to try to get the council caretaker to come and open the community centre . these efforts proved unsuccessful . by now it was approaching dusk , so he was adopted as the parliamentary candidate while standing under a lamp post in the community centre car park — and thus he went into battle . david being david , he fought a feisty campaign . there was lots of music and balloons , and it was all very high profile . however , as he told me when we had supper a few years ago , he thought that he was going to lose but that he would go down fighting . so in the run - up to the count , he wrote a defiant speech , saying that although he had been defeated , margaret thatcher would surely win the election and carry the torch forward . he arrived at the election count armed with this speech , steeling himself for what was to come . as hon . members will know , at an election count there is a moment before the result is read out when the returning officer calls the candidates and agents together to go through the result with them first , and to make sure there are no irregularities and no one wants a recount . the call went out for candidates and agents , and david walked across . there was a small huddle around the returning officer , who turned to david and said , “ we ’ve completed the count , and there is a clear winner . well done , mr amess — you’ve won . ” david looked at him and said , “ what ? ” and the chap said , “ you ’ve won . you ’ve been elected . you ’re the member of parliament for basildon . i ’m going to read it out in five minutes ’ time . i hope you ’ve got your speech ready . ” david looked at the returning officer in awe , and said , “ could you just give me one moment ? ” he dashed into the gents , ripped off some loo paper and jotted down some bullet points , because obviously the speech he had prepared was no longer appropriate , and he went out on to the stage . for the record , he won by 1,379 votes . the result was read out and he observed all the courtesies , and he thanked the returning officer and other officers for conducting an efficient count , he thanked the police for maintaining order , and then he said , “ i never doubted for one moment that i would win this seat . i always knew that by fighting an active and lively campaign , i would be elected to represent the people of basildon in the house of commons . ” and so it was sheer chutzpah literally from the first moment . those of us who knew him know that he carried on like that for the rest of his career , and that is why the house loved him . david always had great concern for all colleagues on all sides of the house , so if he were here now he would be thinking of those about to make their maiden speeches , and he would say something like , “ do n’t worry , do n’t be nervous , you ’ll be absolutely fine . ” and of course you will . after all , you worked very hard to get here — even if you were not adopted under a lamp post . so ladies and gentlemen , it is wonderful to have this debate in his name , and i thank the house and the chair for the great honour of being allowed to open it . to all those who are about to make their first speech in parliament , i say , “ i wish you all the very best of luck — but not too much . ” david amess was my mentor , as he was for many colleagues , and he helped me become a good constituency mp . he also spent time with us , especially colleagues who felt threatened or unsafe ; he gave us his time for nothing . we all miss him . i call daniel francis to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for allowing me the opportunity to make my maiden speech in this debate . it is an honour to follow i would like to start by paying tribute to my predecessor , sir david evennett , who represented our local area for 33 years , first in the former erith and crayford constituency and then in bexleyheath and crayford . he took a keen interest in education , serving twice as a parliamentary private secretary in the education department . he was elected with the other sir david in 1983 and they were close friends , and it is apt that this debate is named after sir david amess . sir david evennett was the only conservative member of parliament to lose their seat in 1997 and then regain it at the second attempt in 2005 , which says a great deal about his tenacity , and i wish him and marilyn a happy and healthy retirement . i note that when sir david evennett made his maiden speech in 1983 , he followed and complimented the then member for sedgefield , who of course went on to be a great prime minister for 10 years , so i say to the right hon . member for rayleigh and wickford , please feel no pressure in the years ahead . at this election , my constituency of bexleyheath and crayford gained parts of the northumberland heath and west heath wards that were previously represented by my hon . friend i have lived in the london borough of bexley all of my life , attended local schools and served as a councillor for 20 years . my constituents include former school friends , former work colleagues , my parents , who are here today , and my grandmother . my constituency is located at the south - east tip of london , with my constituents looking both west into the capital and east across the kent boundary . my family roots are like those of many of my constituents : families from south london who moved a bit further east , with my maternal roots in southwark and my paternal roots in plumstead . we in the constituency are proud of two amazing heritage assets : the grade 1 listed hall place , built in 1537 ; and the red house , designed by philip webb and william morris in 1859 . we are also proud of our contribution to the hits of my childhood , having been the birthplace of boy george and kate bush . we have an industrial past , with the thames at the north of the constituency , but today most jobs are in manufacturing , retail and hospitality . however , that past helped change history and ensure that britain is the country it is today . the vickers works were located in crayford for 101 years , from 1884 , and during the world wars they manufactured the vickers machine gun , aircraft , naval gun laying equipment , and the casings for the barnes wallis bouncing bomb of dambusters fame . famously , it was where the british aviators john alcock and arthur brown manufactured the first vickers vimy bomber , with the first 12 manufactured in crayford , while it was the thirteenth , manufactured elsewhere , which in 1919 made the first non - stop transatlantic flight . that history of our constituency continues today with my constituents across barnehurst , bexleyheath , crayford , northumberland heath , slade green , and the small parts of abbey wood , belvedere , erith and welling that i represent , working hard and delivering for our country . every day i speak to local residents who work in the public sector , and i know how grateful their neighbours are for the work they do and on which we all rely . my constituents rely on train services provided by thameslink and southeastern , which have a depot in slade green where they maintain rolling stock and train staff . it is those railway workers who keep my constituents on the move . those commuters work in the financial and professional jobs that london relies on , but also , importantly , in shops , restaurants and hotels , keeping london ’s economy moving . and if we take a quick glance around any road in my constituency , we see a variety of white vans and black taxis , demonstrating that my constituents are the workers that london relies on to get them from a to b , and the builders , plumbers , brickies and lift engineers who will help us grow our economy . but there is one set of workers on which our community really does rely : our volunteers and carers . today , my day started as many others ’ will have done : i lifted my child from her bed ; i changed her nappy , dressed her , fed her and tidied her hair ; and then i ensured that she was in her wheelchair and ready for her transport to collect her for school . our children are twins but will lead very different paths in life . one talks of a future in work and the journeys she will make ; the other , after many years of work from professionals , can now manage to talk , but her language is limited to about a dozen words . the eldest of our twins has cerebral palsy and a range of complex disabilities . like other carers , the greatest concern that my wife and i have is what will happen to her when we are gone . many of us know what it was like to have to work and educate our children at home for months during the covid pandemic . in our case , this was stretched by the fact that one of our children requires full - time care , our family network and carers were not allowed into our home , and my wife was undergoing chemotherapy at the time — she is now thankfully recovered , due to the fantastic work of our incredible nhs . i can assure members that in my time in this house i will be the greatest of champions for carers and the disabled , because i really do know the challenges that families in our position face on a daily basis : having to fight the local authority because either it has not transferred the money to pay the carer , or it is not paying at a rate that meets minimum wage requirements ; the constant battle to ensure that our child has a wheelchair that works ; the arguments over which part of the public sector will fund the person required to cut our child ’s food at lunchtime because the education , health and care plan is not clear on the matter . i could take the easy path and sit at home rather than be here taking difficult decisions to fix the inheritance bequeathed to this government , but i believe that this house really does need people like me , who know how badly reform is needed in the special educational needs system and for the rights of carers . my constituents , like me , rely on volunteers and charities across the constituency . i am not going to name them , because i am bound to miss one out , but those charities know that i have the greatest admiration for them , having worked alongside them for many years . they make such an important contribution across bexleyheath and crayford , and i look forward to continuing to work with them , our faith groups , businesses and my incredible constituents to deliver the change that our community and our country so desperately need . that speech was very powerful indeed . i call bob blackman . i congratulate it is fitting that this is the first sir david amess adjournment debate since the release of the grenfell inquiry report , because sir david was my immediate predecessor as chairman of the all - party parliamentary fire safety and rescue group . the inquiry ’s report is incredibly comprehensive and makes for terrible reading . i strongly suggest that all members read at least the executive summary — the full report is of a daunting size . it is clear that governments of all persuasions badly let down people in this country and , in particular , the people of grenfell . the all - party group tried relentlessly to bring forward urgent changes to building safety , but they were refused . jason beer kc , representing the department at the inquiry , even apologised on behalf of the government for not listening properly to what the all - party group was saying . sir david said , “ if government had listened to us , grenfell would not have occurred . ” i am glad he has been vindicated on that , but i am very sad that he was not here to hear that . deadly fires do not just happen ; they are the result of a series of failures over a number of years on a number of levels . there were a number of alarming similarities between grenfell and the king ’s cross fire , which claimed 31 lives back in 1987 , although sir martin mentions it only once in his report . i remember it vividly ; i was a commuter to central london at the time . just as sir martin ’s report has done , sir desmond fennell ’s report on the king ’s cross fire identified key failings over several years across many public bodies that could have prevented the fire from spreading out of control . the similarities do not end there ; they include inadequate fire training , the use of unsafe materials and the failings of the london fire brigade . it is alarming how similar the two fires were , despite being dealt with by totally different departments . sir martin talks about improving the cross - government response . i wonder what would have happened if the lessons learned about unsafe building materials at king ’s cross been implemented across all departments . i welcome the government ’s promise to respond to the recommendations within six months , but we need to get the ball rolling on the legislative changes that sir martin recommends sooner rather than later . it will take a long time to get the legislation right , to get it through committee in both houses and on to the statute book , and then to find the solutions to the problem of the regulatory gap as a matter of priority . we can not wait six months for a white paper . i urge the government to consider at least that key point urgently . let us get the legislation laid before this house as soon as possible . that leads me on to the scandal of the remedial work required to fix buildings up and down the country that are still coated in dangerous cladding . the recommendation from king ’s cross to replace wooden escalators took until 2014 to be completed . surely the cladding replacements can not take 27 years as well , but the start has not been great . there is another question about this work : who will pay for it ? i am adamant that it should not be leaseholders and tenants . they are the one group who have done nothing wrong , and i hope that the government will address that point . on monday , i was pleased to be elected unopposed — that is a mode of election that i welcome — as chairman of the backbench business committee . it has terrific honorificabilitudinity . that leads me neatly to my tribute to my predecessor in the role . ian mearns served as chairman for nine years , and as the member of parliament for gateshead for 14 years . i am sure that my other role is chairman of the 1922 committee . you will remember the role well , madam deputy speaker , having been vice - chairman . for the benefit of members who are wondering when the prime minister will face a new opponent at lunchtime on wednesdays , let me say that we have concluded the second ballot of mps ; further ballots will occur after the party conference , and there will be a new leader in november . i thank the officers on the ’ 22 — a somewhat smaller team than in previous years — namely my hon . friend moving on to transport , this is the first opportunity i have had to talk about the new part of my constituency that came in after the boundary changes . i am sure that parlyapp will be pleased to hear that i will not give a history of queensbury from 1249 to 2024 , but there are two interesting titbits on the history of queensbury station . the branch from wembley park to stanmore began life as part of the metropolitan railway , in the final fling of the met as a private venture . government members should perhaps note that all four of the tube stations in my constituency resulted from private investment and initiatives , not government diktat . when queensbury station was built around 90 years ago , there was no development in the area , and the company could not decide what to call it . the local authority adjacent to the area was kingsbury , so naturally it was named queensbury . that leads me on to a bittersweet point about queensbury station . while it was nice to gain queensbury , it is yet another tube station in my constituency without step - free access . those who follow these debates closely will know that i have raised the issue of stanmore station before . it is in dire need of a lift , as it has about 3 million passenger entries and exits a year . i continue to bang the drum and to point out to the mayor of london , transport for london and the department for transport that stanmore is not step - free . in fact , it forces disabled users to wheel themselves through a car park and up a steep ramp on the other side . even one of our great paralympians can not do it unaided . it is completely inadequate as a step - free entrance , and a public lift is badly needed , so that the 48 steps that people are “ meant ” to use while entering or exiting the station can be circumvented . i am disappointed that my pleas seem consistently to fall upon deaf ears , but here is a warning : i will continue to campaign until we get a lift at stanmore station and the other stations in my constituency . we are all conscious in this house of the escalating situation in the middle east . there is a clear and present danger that if terrorists remain in gaza , there will be no long - term resolution to the conflict ; indeed , hezbollah , iran and the extremist forces in the middle east could be dragged into a full - scale war with israel , which none of us wants . i am therefore concerned about several u - turns by the government , which i want corrected . many of us who are friends of israel are alarmed by the message that is sent by the government ’s suspending 30 arms licences . it gives the impression that , in the government ’s eyes , israel and hamas are the same , but let us be clear : they are not , and the government should not treat them as such . i am chair of the all - party parliamentary group on uk - israel , and as we come to the one - year anniversary of the on there needs to be government action on defence spending . we had commitments from the previous government to raising defence spending , first to 2.5 % of gdp and then to 3 % . we now seem to have a road map from the government towards spending 2.5 % . given the challenges that our defence industry faces , we need to take appropriate action . my supported housing ( regulatory oversight ) act 2023 from the last parliament mandated the government to establish a supported housing advisory panel within 12 months of the act being passed . the sifting date was listed as i am conscious that other colleagues want to contribute , so i will mention only one or two other things . on the potential free trade deal with india , the last government promised it by diwali — they forgot which year — but both sides decided to put negotiations on hold because of elections here and , of course , in india . those elections are now over , and the governments have settled into place , so let us get on with the job of getting the free trade agreement that everyone wants . at business questions , i mentioned the tobacco and vapes bill , which i wholeheartedly supported in the last parliament . javed khan ’s review on achieving a smoke - free 2030 ought to be implemented in full . i hope that the government will take on board the various cross - party amendments proposed to the bill , so that we can get over any objections from the industry and progress that legislation swiftly . i am delighted that the government have taken forward the plans for a holocaust memorial and learning centre in victoria gardens . i strongly support that . i also chair the all - party group on holocaust memorial . we recently heard from holocaust survivor eve , who reiterated our plea to get the memorial built before the survivors unfortunately pass away . we are seeing huge increases in antisemitism ; that is clearly a scandal . there has not been a government statement on bangladesh . the government in bangladesh have been displaced and there is a human rights catastrophe , particularly for the hindu population , yet we have heard nothing from the government . i hope that we will hear what the government will do to safeguard bangladeshi citizens . finally , on a local issue , i turn to edgware towers . there is a proposal in the neighbouring constituency to build 29 blocks of high - density multi - storey flats , the tallest of which would be 29 storeys ; 20 would be above 20 storeys high . that is in a cramped area . most important is the proposal to build a bus garage for 100 electric buses under a 29 - storey tower block . given the fires that have taken place on electric buses , the consequences are unthinkable . the london fire brigade has objected , and this proposal should be ruled out of order straightaway at planning application . i thank all colleagues in the house , those in the other place , the staff on our teams , the security teams , the catering teams and everyone else who plays a key part in keeping everything afloat . i also wish everyone celebrating it a very happy rosh hashanah . as ever , i end by paying tribute to my great friend and colleague . we all miss you , david . i hope that everyone has a good recess , enjoys their party conference and finds some time to relax with friends and family . rose — we have 30 members wishing to contribute , so if everybody ’s speech is around five or six minutes , everybody will get in . for her maiden speech , i call olivia bailey . i thank my constituency also has a proud history of defending our great country . there are many military families , and we are also home to the atomic weapons establishment at aldermaston and burghfield . i am really proud of the work that my constituents do there , and i will always support our nuclear deterrent . we are an unusual constituency in that we are made up exclusively of villages and hamlets , discounting our official overlap with reading . there are more than 70 settlements , most nestled in the north wessex downs national landscape . the rivers , fields and architecture around pangbourne and basildon are said to be the inspiration for e. h. shepard ’s beautiful illustrations of “ the wind in the willows ” . my constituency is truly the quintessential english countryside . perhaps the most picturesque leaflet rounds of any constituency are had strolling through streatley , yattendon , compton , east and west ilsley , mortimer and frilsham , although eyebrows were raised when i asked one of my activists to take a trip to the hamlet called world ’s end . thankfully , they were met with beauty rather than eternal doom . i thank the many activists who worked so hard to see me elected to this place , and i thank everyone who placed their trust in me at the ballot box ; many voted labour for the first time . i will work tirelessly to live up to that trust and to fight for everyone in my constituency , no matter how they voted . i know that my predecessors sought to do the same , and i also want to thank them for their service . the majority of my constituency was previously represented by sir alok sharma . he was a good constituency mp , held in high regard by many locally . he was also a tireless campaigner in the battle against climate change , most notably as president of cop26 . i wish him all the best in the other place . i must also mention the last labour mp for reading west , martin salter . martin served for over a decade and gave me one of my first tastes of politics as i undertook my work experience in his office . he remains a force within the constituency — as i am sure hon . members can imagine — as a passionate campaigner for the protection of our waterways , and in particular our fragile and precious chalk streams . my constituency also contains areas previously represented by laura farris and john redwood . i put on record my thanks to them both for their commitment and public service . while the rural villages of berkshire may not be traditional labour territory , i think that my constituency shares the values of this new government . we are a place of service to our country , to our land and to each other . we are a place where people work hard , enriching our economy , our community and our families , and we are a place of opportunity , where our young people can get a great start . in this place , i am determined to do everything in my power to embody that service and support our communities to prosper . my political passion was sparked in the corridors of my school , where government policy in section 28 told me that i should be ashamed of who i was . but my commitment to public service came from my parents . my dad , a police officer known as “ red roy ” because of his belief in building relationships with the community , not simply asserting power , first took me out delivering leaflets for the labour party . my mum , an english teacher who would always fight the corner of even the most badly behaved pupils , instilled in me the determination captured in her favourite book : “ you never really understand a person until you consider things from their point of view ” . i have spent my career trying to honour their contributions . i have developed policy solutions to improve our public services , reconnect the police with their communities and tackle discrimination . i have sought to put the public at the heart of our politics through my work conducting public opinion research . but the political is ultimately personal . it was political progress that enabled my wife and i to marry and to build our own family . my political flame , sparked at school , burns now for my two boys and for all young people still in our care system . it burns most fiercely as i hold the hand of my mum , being taken from me by alzheimer ’s while being let down by the state . i am very proud to find myself here today , and my two boys are very proud as well . the problem is that , having spent the election telling their teachers to vote labour , they are now telling all their friends that i am some sort of supreme leader—[laughter . ] that may be funny , but i am at pains to remind them that the opposite is true : i am a servant , and in the years i have in this place i hope to continue the hard work and dedication of the many men and women who , little by little , have fought for change . beautifully said . i congratulate the hon . members for bexleyheath and crayford ( daniel francis ) and for reading west and mid berkshire ( olivia bailey ) . it is daunting to undertake a maiden speech , but both of them did so with panache and with passion , and my hon . friends and i are grateful to them for sharing their insights with us on this very , i hope , non - partisan occasion . both hon . members rightly spoke about the aspects of their constituencies in which they take pride , and that gives me a cue to put in a brief word for the waterside arts festival , which has been going on this week . sadly , i have had to miss most of it , being up here in westminster , but last saturday , on a very rainy day , i was privileged to see a few of the offerings of this cultural feast , which is supported by culture in common and arts council england . one was a remarkable pair of acrobatic dance artists , olivia quayle and jan patzke , who operate under the title of joli vyann . one artist uses the body of the other as a sort of climbing frame , ultimately ending up standing unsupported on one foot on the head of the other artist . that is not something i have ever seen even on television , let alone live , and it was quite impressive to see it on a rainy saturday afternoon in hythe , in hampshire . another theme was cartoonists , and there was a remarkable , fascinating talk by clive goddard about not only technique but the effort involved in a cartoonist ensuring that his or her precarious life as a freelancer somehow makes economic sense . next year will mark the 80th anniversary of the end of the second world war , so anyone old enough to have fought in that terrible conflict must now be at , or very close to , their 100th birthday . on suitable occasions , i have previously referred to friends among the wartime and early post - war veterans who are now no longer with us . they have included world war two mosquito pilot doug gregory dfc , who flew a replica world war one biplane fighter at air displays until the age of 90 , and who died in 2015 at the age of 92 ; fleet air arm telegraphist air gunner norman “ dickie ” richardson dsm , who flew from hms victorious in the far east , and who died in 2020 aged 96 ; and my late father - in - law , malayan emergency supply drop navigator frank souness dfc , who died at the end of 2022 aged 92 . it is not surprising , but still sad , that this year has seen the passing of the last of my second world war friends , all of whom lived in new forest east . there was marion loveland , who reached the magnificent age of 102 and who was a lady of grace , poise and elegance . she was born on then there was the wonderful liz gregory , the widow of doug , whom i mentioned earlier . she helped him build his replica se5a world war one biplane fighter in their back garden — as one does — and unfailingly supported him in all his flying adventures and escapades . this great lady lived to the age of 95 , and members can read all about her in doug gregory ’s fascinating autobiography , “ aeroaddict ” , published by little knoll press — if i were not forbidden from brandishing props in this presentation , i would wave it around at this point—[laughter . ] finally , just last month , we lost dr arthur page at the age of 100 . he was a comrade of dickie richardson in 849 squadron , fleet air arm , on hms victorious . arthur also flew in the famous palembang raids against the oil refineries in sumatra and on many other dangerous missions in the far east . both the times and the daily telegraph published remarkable obituaries of this fine and gallant officer , who quietly resumed his interrupted medical studies after the war and served as a gp in totton , in my constituency , for more than 30 years . he too continued to fly — until the age of 75 — and members can read about his and dickie ’s adventures in “ palembang and beyond ” , a book written by the late mike roussel . again , i am not allowed to brandish it in the chamber , but it is an eminently worthwhile read . although all those outstanding individuals have now gone , the example they set will long continue to inspire those who knew them and generations yet to come . in the time remaining , i shall return to a continuing constitutional issue , which i previously raised in the debate on the king ’s speech . with the election of select committee chairs having just taken place , we must hope that the prime minister , after consulting the leader of the opposition , will soon present to the house nominations for membership of intelligence and security committee of parliament . the matter is pressing , not just because the committee was about to complete a key inquiry when the election was called , but because of the fact that , while there is no committee , its dedicated expert staff are left vulnerable to the tender mercies of some of those whom it oversees . that is of serious concern . for the benefit of new mps , i should explain that the isc is a cross - party committee of both houses of parliament created by statute . under the justice and security act 2013 , the isc has the legal responsibility for overseeing the uk ’s intelligence community on behalf of parliament and its members . after confirmation in both houses , its members choose their own chairman from among their nine members . right hon . and hon . members may be surprised to learn that the isc ’s office — with a very small number of staff — belongs to the cabinet office , despite the isc overseeing several sensitive organisations within the cabinet office . they would be right to be surprised , because that is indeed a fundamental conflict of interest . that is why , at the time of the justice and security act , the cabinet office was supposed to be only the temporary home of the isc ’s office . yet here we are , more than 10 years later , with the committee ’s staff still beholden to , vulnerable within , and unfairly pressured and even victimised by the very part of the executive the committee is charged with overseeing . the executive should not be able to constrain and control the committee ’s democratic oversight on behalf of parliament by exerting control over the committee ’s small staff team to prevent them doing their job independently . such control means that part of the cabinet office can and does starve the team of resources , so that the isc ’s staff are unable to fulfil the committee ’s legal responsibilities . that is in complete contravention and disregard of a clear ministerial undertaking given by the then deputy prime minister , my right hon . friend the outgoing members of the isc value the committee ’s staff very highly indeed , and we found such treatment to be unacceptable . in the last parliament , the committee therefore formally resolved , by a unanimous vote across all three political parties on the isc , that it is essential for parliamentary democracy and its scrutiny system that the committee ’s office must move out from under the control of the executive — that is , the cabinet office — and should be established instead as an independent “ body corporate ” with a link to parliament rather than to the executive . that unanimous decision was confirmed by the members of the committee at its meeting on this constitutional change , essential to protect the separation of powers , is easy to achieve . it requires a very short amendment to the justice and security act to change the status of the isc ’s office . the amendment would establish an independent office to support the intelligence and security committee of parliament to safeguard the independence of the committee itself . it had been hoped that the amendment would be included in the new legislative programme . unfortunately , but unsurprisingly in the committee ’s absence , the cabinet office has hitherto managed to block it . however , this is to underestimate the previous members of the committee , from both sides of the house and in both chambers , who are convinced that the committee ’s office can not and must not continue to be controlled by the cabinet office . there is already , in the legislative programme , an obvious vehicle for achieving the necessary change : the commonwealth parliamentary association and international committee of the red cross ( status ) bill is designed to change the status of those two organisations . it is therefore the obvious place to include a short amendment to the justice and security act to change the status of the committee ’s organisation , too . as a measure to secure democratic oversight , i am confident that it should and would secure cross - party support in both houses . prior to the election , both the then government and the then opposition seemed to accept that this reform was needed , which does rather beg the question why it has not happened yet . i trust , in conclusion , that the government will ensure that this change is not being blocked somewhere by forces unknown , and will ensure that it is now taken forward , together with the emergency uplift in resourcing that was approved by the then deputy prime minister before the general election but which has been disregarded by the cabinet office since . this is urgently required if the new committee is to have sufficient efficient staff to be able to meet and function fully when it is reconstituted . the government should recognise that this can not wait . too much valuable time has been lost already . i call satvir kaur to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i want to start by congratulating hon . friends and other hon . members on some fantastic maiden speeches today , but also on the many i have heard since the election in july . they have made me proud to be british . however , notwithstanding those incredible speeches and hearing about the amazing and beautiful places across the uk , i would still argue that southampton , the place where i was born and bred , where i have always lived and which i have the honour to represent as the member of parliament for southampton test , is the best city on earth . listen , i know it is a bold claim and many will have heard me make it before , but southampton is where the world meets britain . we have helped shape the world and we continue to do so , from the pilgrims who set sail from southampton on the mayflower over 400 years ago in search of a new life in america , to being the home of the spitfire , which helped to defeat fascism in europe during world war two . it was the university of southampton that invented the internet as we know it today . and were those achievements not enough , southampton also gave the world the fish - finger sandwich — you ’re welcome . we are a city rich with culture , from our medieval walls that protected our nation in times of conflict to our award - winning parks , most notably southampton common , which are the green lungs of our city , and our renowned art galleries and our theatre , the mayflower . southampton is where jane austen was schooled and lived , and it inspired some of her masterpieces . even today , southampton continues to produce great talent , from the singer craig david to “ masterchef ” winner shelina permalloo . southampton is also a world - leading maritime city that is integral to the uk economy . the port of southampton handles over £ 71 billion - worth of trade every year , while also serving as the busiest cruise port in europe . we are a city of political firsts . many will know that our country ’s first prime minister of colour is from southampton . i was the first female sikh council leader in the uk . and the former mp for southampton test , my good friend dr alan whitehead , was the first , and i believe the only politician , to have a song dedicated to them by none other than led zeppelin — clearly , they have a “ whole lotta love ” for alan . now , paying tribute to alan whitehead as my predecessor in this chamber is an honour . he has been one of those unique politicians who was universally liked , valued , and respected on both sides of the house . his knowledge on climate change and green energy is unparalleled . he is essentially the taylor swift of the energy sector . [ laughter . ] i ’m pleased you got it . he leaves behind a legacy , not only of shaping government policy on energy right now but of benefiting future generations , for which we all owe him a huge debt of gratitude . as i approach my 40th birthday in the coming days—[hon . members : “ surely not ! ” ] i know ! it is incredible to think that alan has served our city for as long as i have been alive , first as leader of the council and then as a member of parliament . he has done so with unwavering dedication , integrity and kindness , meaning that he will be sorely missed by many . i am acutely aware that i have very big shoes to fill . alan , and the former member of parliament for southampton itchen , john denham , have both been instrumental in helping me to reach this place today . indeed , john , on a visit to my school fair , awarded me first prize , when i was only eight years old , for my fancy dress costume . i do not know what it was about me dressing up as a clown that made john think that i might one day be destined for a career in politics . the truth is that i owe so much to my incredible city and the remarkable people of southampton who gave me the opportunity to be where i am today . southampton has made me who i am . as someone who grew up in one of southampton ’s most deprived communities , i saw at first hand the importance of community and service to others . southampton has a unique ability to come together when it is needed most . i have been inspired time and time again by the many examples set by our faith organisations , local businesses and incredible local charities , from love southampton , a faith - based initiative , to businesses such as the saints pub on the millbrook estate , and charities like yellow door , no limits and saints foundation . all work tirelessly to make southampton a better place , and remind us that when we lift our poorest and most vulnerable in society , that lifts everyone . our city ’s diversity has made me realise that we are the great place we are because of it — historic , but modern , dynamic , creative , and so much more . i may stand here as our constituency ’s first female mp and mp of colour , but i know that there are many more before me who have paved the way . i feel that responsibility here as well , and feel their weight on my shoulders . as a graduate of southampton ’s two world - class universities — the university of southampton , and then solent university — i know that they put our city on the map , and that both are institutions that inspire , innovate and push boundaries . they have helped me , and our city , to be more forward - thinking and outward - looking . as a saints fan , i must confess that supporting our team is a bit of an emotional rollercoaster , which has taught me , above anything else , enormous resilience . we are thankfully back in the premier league , but whether we are winning or losing , together as one city we march on . i am incredibly proud of southampton and everything it represents , but like any major city , we know that we face challenges . one in every three children lives below the poverty line , and a person ’s life expectancy can drop by 10 years simply by their being the wrong side of a bridge . public services are on their knees , and many families i represent are struggling . that is why i want to be part of the renewal that this labour government are promising , and want to rebuild the services on which my communities rely — from a decent home becoming a basic human right to people feeling safe in our streets and neighbourhoods again ; from having access to healthcare when it is needed to protecting our environment and rivers . another key priority of mine is to ensure that we create opportunities for all , and include the excluded . we know that children from poor areas or ethnic minority backgrounds , or those with disabilities , are not less talented ; they are simply given fewer opportunities . britain ’s talent is spread evenly across our communities and our country . if we are to realise our potential , we must ensure that those opportunities are spread more evenly too . these challenges will not be easy to resolve , but the people of southampton , like so many across britain , are rightfully proud and ambitious for themselves , their families and their country . that is why we need a government who are equally ambitious , and committed to unlocking the potential and opportunities of places like southampton . i know that , as a city , we stand ready to seize this moment to thrive and grow — and the drive , passion , compassion , togetherness and determination of the people of southampton will see it through . let me end by saying directly to them : i will be forever grateful to you for making this daughter of a market stall trader , who grew up in our inner city on free school meals , your member of parliament . you are the very best of me , and i am a product of every opportunity that you have given me . i shall never take that trust for granted , and i will spend every day , in here and beyond , championing our great city , fighting for it , and helping us to reach our enormous potential . it is a pleasure to speak in the debate . it is poignant that it is called the sir david amess debate . i knew sir david well , and the last time i saw him was on the day before he died . i was in qatar with him , in a country that he loved and for which he advocated for many years during his career . when i arrived , he was leaving . i said , “ you are leaving , and i am just arriving . ” he said , “ it ’s nothing personal ; i have my surgery tomorrow , and i ca n’t miss it . ” he was someone who embodied his constituency , and put his constituency and his constituents first . that is something that is shared by all of us , on both sides of the house , and we remember him particularly today . as the new member for southend west and leigh , i have to say that on the doorstep in the constituency everyone knew sir david amess — or they thought they knew sir david amess — and that is the sign of a fantastic constituency mp . although we may be different politically , sir david was an amazing constituency mp . in his name , we are now a city , and that will continue to be recognised through the city day being introduced by the city council . i join the hon . member in recognising sir david and his dedication to his constituents . i know that the hon . gentleman is a new member , and i think that intervention shows the measure of the man that he will be in this house over the next four years . judging by a debate in which he participated yesterday , i know that he will be a vocal advocate for his constituency , and that he will make sir david very proud . it is a genuine honour to follow the maiden speech of i often call the hon . lady “ mrs southampton ” , because that is what she is . we both care about southampton genuinely and passionately . she was a groundbreaking council leader ; she cares about her city and she cares about her constituents ; and she will be a groundbreaking member of parliament . i will just remind her that i secured more votes in southampton test than she did when i stood in 2017 — but i did lose by 12,500 , so she did a lot better than me . as is customary , i wish to raise a few issues on behalf of my constituents . i promise that i will not take too long , because i know that other members want to make their maiden speeches , and today is a day for them — particularly i have always spoken in these debates because i think it important to be able to raise issues on behalf of my constituents — very quickly but also , i hope , very thoroughly . the first issue is one on which i have been campaigning for five years in the house : the access for all funding that the last government awarded to a number of stations — including two in my constituency , hedge end and swanwick — and the vital importance of ensuring that our train stations are accessible to people who are less able - bodied than we are , and to people with children , particularly those with pushchairs . following that five - year campaign and two adjournment debates , we finally received the award , but under the present government i have been told in a letter that the feasibility study funding is under review . that is a disappointment to me and to my constituents , living in an area where there is excessive development built by the leadership of my local council . as the area grows , it is difficult for my constituents to travel to and from work using hedge end station ; they have to get off the train at southampton airport parkway , 9 miles away . i really hope that the hon . member for bridgend will speak to the department for transport to ensure that members on both sides of the house whose local stations have been awarded access for all funding are given urgent clarification of whether they will receive it , because many people in our constituencies will rely on it . i am disappointed that the government have chosen to place this under review . hedge end will not require a massive amount of money . i do not want to hear about a £ 22 billion black hole ; this is not enough money to make a difference to in - year spending . that is the last party - political point that i shall make , but the issue is important in my constituency and many others throughout the united kingdom . the next issue is broadband and mobile phone signal . a lot of new developments have been built in whiteley , in my new constituency of hamble valley . it has the infrastructure of a number of old , chocolate - box villages that i inherited from the old constituency of winchester . many young professionals have bought homes along the curbridge corridor and down into burridge , and , in this world of working from home , they want to be able to conduct their business and their work life at home . a number of them receive fines because they can not pay their bills , and a number are getting into trouble because they can not turn up to work . i am very interested in hearing from the government on the investment — maybe not necessarily today , but i hope they can allocate some time to debate the really important issue of digital deserts across the united kingdom , which is vital . my new constituency is more rural than my old one , and i have picked up this issue across the whole of the constituency since i became its member of parliament on i want to raise an issue that the government will hear about from me in a number of debates over the next five years : we need a walk - in centre in whiteley in my constituency . we have the fantastic fareham community hospital , which has a great diagnostic team . it opens its doors to the local community and takes some of the pressure off the primary care services that we have in other areas of the constituency , but we need to have more services at the hospital . it is a fantastic site and , with its excellent leadership and staff , has the capability to provide more primary care and more acute care . i hope that the government will look at allocating funding for walk - in centres at fareham community hospital and in whiteley shopping centre . lastly , people who are watching us from the gallery or on television — i suspect there are not many — do not see the hard work of the staff of this house . i particularly thank my office staff — they are paid by me , so they should expect to do all the hard work — and the house staff , who are really important . they include the clerks and the doorkeepers , who make sure that i get to meetings from time to time and that i know where i am going . new members will find them particularly useful . i also thank all the catering staff and the people who make our lives here easier . i wish them a wonderful break as we go to argue things out at our party conferences . i hope they get a rest . may i wish all members from across the whole house , who represent a vast array of different parties , a wonderful recess ? go and have a good argument at various seaside locations across the united kingdom . i must put on record my thanks to the staff in the tea room , particularly margaret , godfrey and gemma ; otherwise , they will not make me a good cup of tea . i call sally jameson to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . it is an honour to deliver my maiden speech in the sir david amess adjournment debate , and to follow some truly inspirational maiden speeches by members from across the house , and the speech by it was the honour of my life to be elected to represent doncaster central — my home , the place where i was born , and a place i care deeply about . doncaster ’s industrial history is one of transformation and innovation , shaping us into the town , and now city , that we are today . during the industrial revolution we became renowned for railway manufacturing . we built iconic trains like the mallard and the flying scotsman , which are still a source of great pride . we also have a long and deep mining history , which has significantly shaped our local economy , community and heritage . only the other week , i was at the markham main miners memorial gardens in armthorpe for the annual commemoration of the miners who died in the mine . the gardens remind us all of the miners ’ sacrifice , but also of the community that they helped to build , which is still woven into the spirit of doncaster today . we also have much to celebrate . this week , young chefs from the dn1 delicatessen and dining room are at the world skills culinary arts final in france . we have exciting and innovative companies , like clean power hydrogen and agemaspark , and a young generation ready to shape our future , like millie and emily from hall cross sixth form , who did their work experience on my campaign . from our racecourse , where the st leger festival takes place this weekend — that is a quick plug — to our beautiful mansion house and our sensational market , we may be a new city , but we have a long and rich history , which makes me proud to say that i am from doncaster . while we have much to be proud of , i must also recognise that doncaster has faced a number of challenges over the past 14 years , with cuts to local government and a number of broken promises . but there are opportunities to grasp . the labour government ’s commitment to making britain a clean energy superpower will not only bring down the soaring bills that people in doncaster face , but bring greater energy security and the opportunity for a new , green industrial future with great british energy . as a labour and co - operative mp , i am particularly proud that , as part of that mission , we will deliver a local power plan that will have the community at its heart in order to empower people and the places where they live . i am sure that we in doncaster will seize on this new industrial strategy to forge our future and build our city ’s legacy . i am also determined to work alongside our fantastic council leadership , mayor ros jones and deputy mayor glyn jones , the brilliant doncaster chamber , and my parliamentary colleagues across the city as we work to get our airport reopened and ensure that it thrives , and to get the health service and hospital that we so desperately need and deserve . i could not let this speech pass without paying tribute to my incredible predecessor , baroness winterton of doncaster . baroness winterton is a formidable politician , an incredible woman and a dear friend . she served as a government minister across a number of departments , as a long - serving opposition chief whip and , of course , latterly as deputy speaker of this house . doncaster is a better place for having had baroness winterton as our mp for 27 years , and while i know that i will never be able to live up to her legendary shoe collection , i hope that i am able to continue her legacy of service to the people of doncaster central and to this house . it is a great source of personal pride for me to be one of only two prison officers elected to parliament , and to be one of the only poa branch chairs . today i want to acknowledge my former colleagues in his majesty ’s prison service across the country , who are doing an incredibly difficult job in increasingly difficult circumstances . for too long , the work of prison staff has gone unnoticed and without reference to the outside world , and i am determined to change this with my election to this house and my appointment as a parliamentary private secretary in the ministry of justice . i want to pay tribute to the prisons in my area , starting with hmp doncaster in my own constituency . i pay tribute to hmp lindholme , and to hmp and yoi hatfield , in doncaster east and the isle of axholme . finally — i am saving the best till last — i pay tribute to the staff at hmp and yoi moorland , where it has been a privilege to serve for over six years with some of the bravest and most dedicated people i have ever met . they take on workplace challenges that most could not bear to think of . no matter what danger you are in , they are by your side . in moments of peril , you know that you do not need to look behind your shoulder to see what is there , because your colleagues have always got your back . to work in a place that is fraught with so many dangers and so many difficulties , and still to feel safe , is a testament to the people with whom you work . today i pay tribute to the prison staff at hmp and yoi moorland for their commitment to our service and for their friendship , which will stay with me throughout my time in this house and , indeed , for the rest of my life . the criminal justice and prison system has highlighted to me the many things that we still need to do to ensure that children get the best start , and one area that needs urgent work is the children ’s care system . sadly , there are a disproportionate number of care - experienced people in our criminal justice system , and they make up around a quarter of the overall prison population . this shows the urgent need to address the fact that we are failing so many of the most vulnerable children , leaving them targets for predators and criminal gangs . we are failing to give them the start in life that we would expect for our own family and friends . in this area , along with so many other areas , including economic growth and restoring our services in doncaster and across the country , change must come . i will ensure that i use every day during my time in this house to speak up and be a part of the change that the new government will bring , to serve my constituents in doncaster central and to bring the prosperity , public services and progress that we deserve . i call freddie van mierlo to make his maiden speech . that was very well pronounced , madam deputy speaker . i echo the comments about sir david amess . i am also grateful to i thank my predecessor , john howell , who represented the constituency for 16 years before stepping down . i am sure that the whole house will join me in wishing him well as he recovers from a stroke . among his achievements was his commitment to the council of europe ; he led the uk delegation for many years . it is sad to see conservative leadership hopefuls now calling for the uk to step back from the council of europe by leaving the european court of human rights . that would put us alongside belarus , russia and the vatican as the only non - member european nations . it is an honour to be the new mp for henley and thame , which is a new constituency made up largely of the former henley seat that was last liberal in 1910 . in the intervening period , the constituency has played host to well - known members of the house , including , most famously , michael heseltine and the former prime minister , boris johnson . although they are well - known names , i am very much looking forward to making my own distinct contribution to this house . i can only hope to emulate my relative , hans van mierlo , the founder of the dutch liberal party d66 , who exited government more respected and popular than when he entered — a rarity in modern politics . i will not comment on which of my predecessors achieved that feat and which did not . thame is one of the two main towns of the constituency , alongside henley - on - thames . as well as hosting two stunning , chocolate - box market towns , the constituency is characterised by the chilterns national landscape and its iconic escarpment , and is bisected by a section of the historic ridgeway national trail . henley and thame is also host to a significant portion of the oxford green belt , and is criss - crossed by an abundance of well - cared - for villages and hamlets , such as the wonderful waterstock and waterperry in the north of the constituency , and the aptly named christmas common , which has supplied and decorated christmas trees for no . 10 for many years . watlington is the constituency ’s lesser - known third town , but is nevertheless known locally for its vibrant high street and welcoming community . it is also the town that i have had the sincerest pleasure of representing as a county and district councillor since 2021 and 2023 respectively . the rivers thames and thame and their chalk stream tributaries define not only much of the physical landscape of the constituency , but the communities that live there . henley is , of course , home to the annual royal regatta , which fills residents with pride . this year , there is much to be proud of as we welcome our olympic and paralympic heroes back to oxfordshire . in recent years , however , the river has been filled with something altogether more sinister . rowers treat the water as a toxic substance , meticulously cleaning hands and covering mouths while they row , but that is still not enough to stop the steady flow of reports of serious illness following encounters with the waste - filled water . the shameful sewage crisis cuts deep in henley and thame , with henley - on - thames town council recently declaring no confidence in thames water in a precedent - setting vote . i join the council in declaring no confidence in thames water in this chamber , and call for proper root and branch reform . i am honoured to represent raf benson and its residents , and i pay tribute to the men and women of the armed forces who serve this country so ably . the constituency has a considerable and proud military history that dates back to the battle of chalgrove field in 1643 . exactly 300 years later , construction started on chalgrove airfield , from which reconnaissance missions were flown in preparation for the invasion of occupied europe . later , us army pathfinders set off from chalgrove , dropping into holland as our allied forces sought to liberate my father ’s home town of arnhem in operation market garden . that same airfield now hosts the world ’s leading manufacturer and tester of ejector seats and fighter aircraft . sadly , the airfield was sold off to homes england under the conservatives and forced into an unpopular local plan as a site allocated for a new town . i will continue to support residents in their fight to keep chalgrove a village and to protect its heritage in defence . i close with a few words of thanks to my wonderful wife , who has put up with so much from me as i set about reversing 114 years of conservative rule in henley and thame . i feel extremely privileged to stand in this chamber , but whatever the future holds , i will have no greater privilege than being married to my wife . having committed that sentiment to the public record , i trust i have now corrected my failure to mention her in my 6 am acceptance speech . i am not sure that is the get - out clause the hon . gentleman is hoping for . i call phil brickell to make his maiden speech . it is a privilege to serve my constituents as the first labour member of parliament for bolton west in almost a decade , and to speak in this debate under your chairship , madam deputy speaker . it is an honour to speak in the sir david amess adjournment debate . i extend my thanks to as a new mp , i pay tribute to my predecessor , chris green , who always tried his best for the people of bolton west . it is a great honour to be elected alongside my hon . friends the members for bolton north east ( kirith entwistle ) , and for bolton south and walkden ( yasmin qureshi ) . it is the first time in nine years that bolton has elected three labour members of parliament . i look forward to working with them to realise my ambitions for a healthier , more prosperous constituency . over the years , bolton west has had a long tradition of pioneering labour members of parliament . baroness ann taylor served bolton west from 1974 to 1983 . in her maiden speech , she noted the vital role that government can play in addressing regional inequalities , and she highlighted the need for civic pride in our towns — both themes that , 50 years later , continue to resonate with my constituents . ann still serves in the other place . i am proud to call her a friend . she is a true inspiration and i pay tribute to her for her lifetime of public service . more recently , ruth kelly was first elected to represent bolton west in 1997 , before going on to serve in the cabinet . most recently , julie hilling served as the mp from 2010 to 2015 . i am the first male labour member of parliament for my constituency since the 1970s and , rest assured , i have big boots to fill . may i now enlighten the house about my background ? surprisingly , i am the first brickell in this place , and i am proud to be bolton born and bred . my parents served our country for many years . my father was a soldier in the royal artillery , stationed in germany , northern ireland , canada and cyprus , before going on to work as a paramedic in bolton and then as a carer on the minimum wage ; and my mother worked in the women ’s health department at the royal bolton hospital for more than 30 years . indeed , my first job was at the bolton hospital , before i went on to spend more than a decade tackling serious financial crime — bribery , corruption , money laundering and the facilitation of tax evasion . let us not forget that four out of 10 victims of crime are victims of fraud , often online . the importance of public service was instilled in me from a young age by my parents , which is why i found myself wanting to stand for election to this place . i pay tribute to my family and my wife for their tireless support of my campaign to become a member of parliament and my ongoing work on behalf of my constituents . bolton west is a misleading name for a constituency that is made up of towns with distinct local identities . there is the former mining town of westhoughton , the historic locomotive town of horwich , blackrod , and the western fringes of bolton . straddling the m61 between rivington pike and leigh , the towns of bolton west have a rich history . indeed , last week marked the 126th anniversary of the winter hill mass trespass , when working people walked up together from bolton to the west pennine moors in search of open countryside , fresh air and a right to roam . to this day , there remains work to be done to open up our countryside for all to enjoy in a responsible manner , and i will work throughout this parliament to secure that goal . i know that mr speaker and i have a shared interest in following the ups and downs of bolton wanderers football club , who play their matches at the toughsheet community stadium and provide vital support in the community for my constituents . horwich has a long history of manufacturing , and more recently , the services economy , which is centred around the middlebrook retail and business parks . it is home to scan computers , a pioneering firm that remains family - owned to this day and that continues to invest in local talent across the borough . elsewhere , mbda , one of the uk ’s largest defence firms , manufactures at the logistics north site in my constituency . cohens chemist , which provides invaluable gp and pharmacy services , is headquartered in lostock . finally and importantly , the plastic recycling firm toughsheet focuses on repurposing waste products for use in the building industry . there are fantastic organisations and charities working day in , day out to support my constituents . bolton mountain rescue team , based in ladybridge hall , is made up of tireless volunteers who are called out every week to save lives . pioneering charities such as the hub in westhoughton and blackrod sports and community centre go above and beyond to ensure that local people have opportunities to thrive . turning back to politics , the recent general election campaign spoke to many of my constituents ’ concerns : the state of the local nhs ; the reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete found in our local hospital and schools ; the 8 am scramble each morning to obtain a gp appointment ; spiralling housing costs ; the need for better , well - paid jobs in the local area ; better integrated transport that is both reliable and affordable ; and effective policing that prevents individuals from falling into a life of crime , tackles repeat offending and ensures that local people feel safe in their neighbourhood . i will work as hard as i can to secure the improved public services my constituents urgently deserve . i also want to draw attention to what will be a key focus during my time here — standards in public life . we must always strive to be better if we are to retain public trust . we all know that politics has the potential to change lives immeasurably for the better , yet all too often , the public feel let down , and there is a perception that vested interests sometimes subsume those of constituents in need of support , but it does not have to be like this . that is why i am proud to see the prime minister stress the importance of public service . as we look ahead to the remainder of this parliament , let us never forget why we are here and who we serve . let us embrace the politics of unity , which recognises that we can achieve lasting progress for our constituents by working together across party divides . let us turn our back on the dog - whistle politics that sows division . the truth is that politics is far more difficult , more nuanced and , yes , more fractious than many of us might like to admit . i end by drawing an analogy between this place and my favourite pastime . in my spare time , i am an avid white water kayaker , navigating our rivers from source to sea . the sport has taken me to far - flung destinations such as the nepalese himalayas , the white nile in uganda as it flows north out of lake victoria , and the upper reaches of the alps . white water kayaking is an assumed - risk sport , and it is a team endeavour . there are many obstacles to navigate on the way downstream , blind corners that might belie a tree blocking the entire river , vicious recirculating features that can trap a kayaker whole , and huge hidden waterfalls can appear suddenly . that is before we get to the effluence being discharged into our waterways . the parallels to politics are striking , even for those uninitiated in the dark arts of navigating white water . growing up , i had a poster on my wall quoting the chinese philosopher confucius . it read : “ one ’s greatest glory is not in never falling , but in rising every time one falls . ” that is an apt quote for politics , and one that we would all do well to bear in mind over the coming weeks and months . together we have the power to make a lasting impact that will benefit our constituents . that is the privilege of being elected to this place , and it is one on which i intend to deliver during the coming years on behalf of the people of bolton west . i call david reed to make his maiden speech . i congratulate all hon . members who have delivered their maiden speech . they have all spoken about their constituency with wit , passion and enthusiasm , and i have no doubt that they will be strong representatives for their constituents . it is a real privilege to deliver my maiden speech during the sir david amess general debate . sir david was a stalwart member of this house and was barbarically murdered in the line of parliamentary duty . as i stand here in this most historic of chambers , i look over to sir david ’s memorial plaque behind the government benches and , as i start life as a member of parliament , i hope i can be a strong voice and a man of action for my constituents , as sir david was for his . i start with a heartfelt thank you to the people of exmouth and exeter east , for they are the reason i am here . they have put their trust in me to represent them as the first member of parliament for our new constituency . it is a responsibility that will always weigh heavily on my shoulders . i also say thank you to my family and campaign team , who have been bastions of love and support through the long journey to this place . for the record , i want it to be known that getting married during the early stages of a general election campaign makes for an interesting start . thank you to my wife for being a constant voice of reason and my rock throughout . although exmouth and exeter east is a new constituency , it was created by amalgamating areas from three previous constituencies , of which east devon was by far the largest contributor . referring to all my predecessors , as is custom in a maiden speech , may , therefore , mark me to the speaker ’s office as someone who does not abide by time limits . i say this because all three of my predecessors have made significant contributions to local and national life . simon jupp , the former member for east devon , worked hard for his constituents and campaigned relentlessly as chair of the all - party parliamentary group for the great south - west . he helped to secure investment into the region and always championed our part of the world . i consider simon to be a friend , and his contribution to this house will be missed , as will his encyclopaedic knowledge of local devon ciders . exmouth and exeter east also incorporates one ward each from the exeter and central devon constituencies . lastly , i have been blessed to inherit the beautiful exe valley from my right hon . friend for those who have not had the good fortune to visit exmouth and exeter east , please allow me to indulge in a cook ’s tour of my new constituency , and to give members a flavour of the geography , the history , the settlements , the people and the organisations that make my part of the world so irresistibly enchanting . starting at the mouth of the river exe , going out to the heathlands of woodbury common and finishing in the countryside above the city of exeter , the constituency of exmouth and exeter east has it all : beautiful beaches ; serene , open and arable landscapes ; the eastern part of a thriving city ; vibrant towns ; and picturesque villages . many parts of my new constituency have been inhabited for several millennia , with areas such as topsham being settled by the celts , turned into a port by the romans and expanded by the saxons . possibly our most famous resident has been sir walter raleigh , who was an elizabethan statesman , soldier , writer and explorer . although he achieved much in his life , i will do my best not to meet the same fate , which was to be tried for treason before meeting his end outside this chamber in old palace yard . we have some fantastic organisations across exmouth and exeter east , such as the royal national lifeboat institution , which works tirelessly to keep locals and tourists safe in the waters around the constituency . we have global experts working to advance the frontiers of knowledge on weather and climate at the met office ’s headquarters . we have clinton devon estates , which is ably responsible for the stewardship of much of the land in the southern area of the constituency . as an example , the clinton devon estates team , working with the environment agency , recently demonstrated to the world how to proactively regenerate land by completing the lower otter restoration project . as is to be expected , we are fortunate to have some of the best farming produce anywhere in the country . for those looking to visit , i highly recommend stopping in for a pasty at darts farm or greendale farm shop . however , the organisation that has the most special place in my heart is commando training centre royal marines . for decades , the training camp in lympstone and the area of woodbury common have been the proving ground for all wannabe royal marines , and for those from across our armed forces who aspire to become commandos . having endured royal marine commando training over 16 years ago , i am happy to announce that i have learned , once again , to enjoy spending time on woodbury common , without fear of being cold , wet , hungry and covered in gorse thistles . the royal marines is a proud organisation , in its 360th year in service to our country . sadly it had become increasingly rare for a former royal marine to enter this house as a member . however , royal marines must share the same tendencies that buses are afflicted by : none turn up for eons , then four turn up at the same time . although the other three former royal marines , the hon . and gallant members for plymouth moor view ( fred thomas ) , for halesowen ( alex ballinger ) and for birmingham selly oak ( al carns ) , opted to join the party now in government , i know that the kinship that binds royal marines together through shared adversity will benefit this house , and , i hope , provide combative but constructive debate . while exmouth and exeter east has much to be celebrated , it also has its fair share of issues . from an aged and degraded sewerage network to antisocial behaviour , there are many issues that my constituents have placed trust in me to help improve . for too long we have built new houses in the area without delivering appropriate and corresponding infrastructure . i fear the new government ’s top - down housing targets will further compound that issue , and i will do all i can to ensure that the right mix of houses are built , in the right places , with the right infrastructure and public consultation . i am also deeply concerned that large parts of exmouth and exeter east will be tarmacked over within one generation . of course we need new homes for the next generation , so that they can live near their friends , family and work , but we must have a tempered approach and ensure that we do not overdevelop and destroy our countryside , and the culture of our historic towns and villages . there are also areas that i will work hard to improve across exmouth and exeter east , such as social care provisions , post-16 education schemes , job opportunities , transport links , and support for farmers and those in rural affairs . it is worth voicing that this new parliament brings the winds of political change to devon and the wider south - west of england . as a new mp , i am open and willing to work with fellow south - west mps , regardless of political affinity , to ensure we drive as much investment and opportunity as possible to our part of the world , in a joined - up way . in an increasingly connected world , i believe our mps must have a firm understanding of the national and international issues that affect us , and most importantly how these issues affect our constituencies . for much of my adult life , i have fought hard in several organisations to keep our united kingdom safe and prosperous , both in the physical and the digital environment . we are on the precipice of a new industrial revolution . frontier technologies , such as artificial intelligence , supercomputing and nanobiotechnology , will radically change our world and the relationship we have with it . it is imperative that the new government understand these issues and work across the public and private sector to ensure that our united kingdom remains a technological global leader . there is no getting away from the fact that the international system is becoming more volatile . it is deeply sad that conversations about international conflict are no longer hypothetical . war has broken out across multiple global regions , and we must act without delay to increase defence spending to meet the threats that are clearly present . anthropogenic climate change has long ceased to be purely an academic debate — it is visible and happening now . we must continue to work closely with international partners to reduce our overall global carbon emissions . it is beyond a faux pas to speak in communist tones from the conservative benches — i could risk making the same treasonous mistake as sir walter raleigh . however , there is modern resonance in lenin ’s purported quote : “ there are decades where nothing happens ; and there are weeks where decades happen . ” in isolation , any of the points i have raised have the ability to cause mass societal and environmental change . when decades happening in weeks become the new normal , we must keep pace to ensure the united kingdom remains strong , allied and ahead of the pack in an ever - changing world . my final message is to the people of exmouth and exeter east who sent me to this house . i promise that i will always fight for us , and that i will represent us to the best of my ability , while i have the privilege of serving as their member of parliament . i call jonathan davies to make his maiden speech . i congratulate i will begin by thanking my predecessor as member of parliament for mid derbyshire , pauline latham , for all she did to serve its residents . pauline represented the constituency from its creation in 2010 until she stood down at the end of the last parliament . prior to 2010 , the communities that make up the constituency were part of other constituencies , served by many illustrious former members , perhaps most notably george brown . pauline championed many important causes in this place , including international development . she also led the charge to increase the marriage age from 16 to 18 , a lasting change that reduces the risk of young people being subjected to coercion or abuse . i send pauline my every best wish for her next chapter , and i look forward to working with her on areas of shared concern . a small but important part of my constituency was served by the former member for derbyshire dales , sarah dines . i thank her for her service and i am sure my hon . friend one of the most exciting priorities of this new mission - led government is their commitment to harnessing the power of nature to deliver clean power and , in turn , to deliver energy security , new jobs and cheaper bills . there is a history , stretching back over 250 years , of using nature to power the economy in the derwent valley , which runs through mid derbyshire . the world ’s first water - powered mills were built on its river banks to spin cotton , making the valley the birthplace of the industrial revolution . among its early pioneers was jedediah strutt , a hosier and cotton spinner from belper . through an entrepreneurial approach , strutt progressed from humble beginnings to become one of the leading industrialists of his age . along with sir richard arkwright and samuel need , he was a father of the modern factory system , which was adopted around the world . although the derwent valley no longer hums to the clatter of looms or the rhythm of the people who operated them , it continues to harness nature to sustainably power homes and businesses through the hydroelectric schemes it supports today . however , despite the valley being the east midlands ’ only unesco world heritage site , and home to some of the country ’s most beautiful landscape and extensive biodiversity , some of the valley ’s iconic industrial buildings face an uncertain future , due to their poor state of repair and lack of occupation . we must save these buildings . they have incredible potential , including to support local economies , increase job opportunities and alleviate the housing crisis . they are also vital to telling derbyshire ’s story , and the story of our country . celebrating and preserving the past is not frivolous or sentimental nostalgia . it is vital to our sense of place and our perception of who we are today , what we share with others and what makes us distinctive . knowing where we have come from also shapes where we venture next ; that is as true of buildings , countryside and historic sites as it is of our politics . it is also true of our arts and culture . the creative industries are among britain ’s most important exports . they are a huge part of our economy and boost our standing around the world . they are a vital catalyst to express and explore ideas and bring communities together . they have been common to every culture since primordial times . music , the visual arts , dance and drama provide an opportunity to walk in somebody else ’s shoes . they build a more inquiring society and help us to understand who we are and what it might be like to have somebody else ’s experience . they are also a vital educational tool , but in far too many cases they are not a staple in schools or something that people have an adequate opportunity to engage with throughout their life . i look forward to making the case , throughout my time in this place , that this is an underused opportunity for our country . as we face the huge challenges ahead and return the country to economic stability and renewal , opportunity must be our watchword : opportunity to help people get ahead in life through good jobs , for example in the small and medium - sized businesses that proliferate in my constituency or at places like smartparc in spondon , where food production is being reimagined ; opportunity to benefit from exceptional education and training , such as is being offered at rolls - royce and at the university of derby in my constituency ; opportunity to enjoy good health and community safety through renewed public services ; and opportunity to live in a greener world through the new government ’s commitment to the environment and to tackling climate change . being given the opportunity to serve the people of mid derbyshire is the privilege of my life , and i thank everyone who supported me along the way . i thank the voters of mid derbyshire : whether they voted for me or not , i am here to serve them . i also thank my many friends and family , who have been a great source of strength on the journey . i am determined to do the people of mid derbyshire proud , and to support the new government to deliver the change that my constituents tell me they need and that they rightly deserve . it is a real privilege to contribute to my first sir david amess adjournment debate . i did not have the privilege of knowing him , but may i acknowledge and pay tribute to his colleagues for keeping his memory very much alive ? we have had some brilliant maiden speeches this afternoon , and i know that there are more to come . i congratulate i wish over the summer recess , i spent a lot of time in the smaller communities in my constituency , including knotty green , winchmore hill , chenies , coleshill , seer green and jordans . there were some common themes that i would like to raise before the house adjourns . as members might imagine , some of the issues are particularly local to the area . in coleshill , there is real frustration at the continuing lack of broadband in the village . in coleshill and winchmore hill , i was told about the lack of reliable bus services . recent bus timetable changes have made it harder for pupils to get back to school this term . a solution was found for the boys at a local boys ’ school , but the same can not be said for the girls , who no longer have a viable way to get to one of the local girls ’ schools on public transport from the villages affected by the timetable change . i am mystified as to why boys and girls have been treated differently by the council . it will not surprise the house that in all the villages that i went to , residents shared their horror at the state of our rivers . many of them volunteer on the river chess and the river misbourne , which are rare chalk streams , and they can see the devastating impact of pollution and sewage . a number of younger constituents came to share their concern for the environment and for making sure we all do our bit to save the planet . i pay tribute to one young constituent , stella jackson , for presenting her petition to me : she deserves particular praise for her efforts in gathering signatures for the petition that she ran in her village to encourage us all to reduce , refuse , recycle and reuse . while i am talking about our young people , i have to say that i was encouraged to see that last week ’s westminster hall debate on services for special educational needs and disabilities was so well attended ; indeed , i was unable to voice the experiences of my constituents , because westminster hall was so full . there is a crisis in send provision . in our local area , buckinghamshire council states that demand for send services has increased by 50 % in the past three years alone , and that this is unsustainable . the heartbreaking conversations that i had with families over the summer support that assessment . it is also hard to hear the stories of people of all ages who have been waiting for healthcare appointments and treatments . we know the nhs is under great pressure . we know , too , that healthcare workers are working tirelessly in difficult circumstances . i hope that we can look back on today ’s darzi report as the point at which the nhs started to turn a corner . i wish to finish by mentioning the pensioners from my constituency who came to see me this summer worried about the cuts to the winter fuel allowance . the matter came up in every village that i visited . since the summer recess , almost 100 other constituents have written to me with similar concerns . this government can not be held accountable for the mess they inherited , but stripping support from the poorest pensioners just when energy bills are set to rise again can not be the answer . one constituent with parkinson ’s told me that cutting back on their heating will almost certainly exacerbate their symptoms . taking away this vital support is , quite simply , the wrong thing to do . i call dave robertson to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . may i thank hon . members who have made their first speeches today for setting the bar so high ? i hope i can live up to the standard that they have set . i am sent to this place by the constituents of lichfield , a constituency that includes not only the city itself , but the town of burntwood and around 40 villages and hamlets in the great county of staffordshire . i am proud to serve the area that has been my home since before i knew to call anywhere home , and where i hope it will be for many , many more years to come . my predecessor in this house was sir michael fabricant . he was knighted in 2023 for political and public service after more than 30 years representing first the constituency of mid staffordshire and then lichfield in this house . thirty - two years in total sir michael served , and i think that would be a number to which we would all aspire . should i be fortunate enough to still be in this place in 30 years ’ time , madam deputy speaker , i can only hope to have such a head of hair . it is , however , to longevity that i wish to turn now . although i have received advice from some colleagues not to mention the domesday book , i can neatly sidestep that as the recorded history of my constituency dates back some 1,000 years before william the conqueror to the roman invasion and the establishment of letocetum , a roman fort and later settlement near the crossroads of watling street and rykneld street in my constituency . the crossing of those two roads remained an important place throughout the roman and saxon periods , and , in the 7th century , chad of mercia established a cathedral and diocese in lichfield , which still exists today . in just over a week ’s time , i will be proud to be in attendance at the installation of — i think — the 58th dean of lichfield cathedral . the right reverend jan macfarlane will be the first woman to hold that post and will not only smash a glass ceiling , but be an excellent advocate for the cathedral and the church in the local community and beyond . the 7th century is also noteworthy for the burying of the staffordshire hoard , which was uncovered in hammerwich in my constituency in 2009 , near that same crossroads of watling street and rykneld street . the largest collection of anglo - saxon gold ever found , the hoard is already having , and will continue to have , a significant impact on our understanding of the people of these isles , before there was an england , a scotland , a wales or a northern ireland . let me move on from the 7th century . over the coming years , the city would continue to flourish and establish itself as a religious and ecumenical centre , although much of the surrounding area maintained its rural and agrarian aspect for many centuries to come . in this time , the area did produce innumerable great lives , and , while they are far too numerous to mention all of them here , i should note gregory king , the world ’s first economic statistician ; elias ashmole , whose collections founded the ashmolean museum , the first of its type in the uk ; david garrick , the noted theatre innovator and manager ; the physician erasmus darwin , a founding member of the lunar society who had a rather famous grandson ; the poet , anna seward ; thomas gisborne of yoxall lodge , an abolitionist and a close associate of william wilberforce ; the painter john louis petit , who is having a wonderful renaissance in the understanding of his work ; frederick oakeley , who translated the words to “ o come all ye faithful ” in lichfield cathedral ; and , of course , samuel johnson , a man of letters and the author of the first dictionary of the english language . johnson ’s heir , samuel barber , was a freed slave who would go on to run a school in burntwood , decades before tom jenkins would begin teaching in teviothead in scotland , and who would also serve as a dozener in local government in lichfield and almost certainly become the first black man to serve in local government in the uk . before i move on from some famous people from around the area , i should mention a local success story in sophie capewell . lichfield ’s golden girl brought home not just a gold medal from paris this year , but a world record as part of team gbs fantastic efforts . in doing so , she ended my reign as the most successful former pupil of my old school , nether stowe in lichfield , and although i had hoped to hold that title a little longer than 32 days , i am happy to be disappointed on that point . returning to my historical tour of lichfield and its surrounding area , we reach the early and mid-19th century , and the town of burntwood , a conurbation of mining villages , which grew up some four miles from lichfield and has a similarly proud history . its most notable resident was the fundraiser and campaigner stephen sutton , who raised millions for the teenage cancer trust despite his diagnosis . we lost him far too soon , at the age of just 19 . he was made an mbe for his fundraising , so it is more than fitting that burntwood town council remembers him through a student award named in his honour . not to be outshone by the cathedral down the road , burntwood also took its place in ecclesiastical history when , in 1883 , st anne ’s church in chasetown became the first in the country to have electric lighting . today , the people of burntwood still maintain a close - knit community , typical of former mining areas . that is shown by the great examples of the spark café and burntwood be a friend , which have done so much to step in to replace services cut during 14 long years of conservative government . if we are discussing burntwood , we can not forget the giant - killing exploits of chasetown fc in the fa cup of 2007 - 08 . at some point , i will forgive the members for cardiff . burntwood is not the only part of my constituency that has a mining history . the village of handsacre also more than played its part in powering the industry of the 19th and 20th centuries . it is also the village where my old man taught his first lessons as a probationary teacher in the 1970s . as for the suggestion that his geordie accent was in part responsible for his hiring in a school built to teach the children of new arrivals from the north - east , that remains suspected , if unconfirmed . mining was not the only industry that found its way to my part of staffordshire . many of us will recognise the name armitage shanks , but few will know its links to the village of armitage , just a short trip up rugeley road from handsacre . as the new government focus their legislative agenda on growth , i remind colleagues that while many of us may have already spent a penny with armitage shanks , they are all welcome to visit and spend many more in the coming years . all this industry meant that the canals came to my constituency . the coventry canal and the trent and mersey canal are still navigable today , and the work of the lichfield and hatherton canal restoration trust should be commended , as it aims to restore that link as a green and blue way over the coming years . having touched again on transport , i will complete the circle and return to the crossroads that made letocetum . watling street , or the a5 , as it is now known , and rykneld street , the a38 , are major transport arteries that link my constituency together , and link it easily to the rest of the country . the a38 in particular has helped to establish a logistics centre in the village of fradley on the site of the former raf lichfield . fans of the bbc ’s “ bargain hunt ” will know fradley well , given the regular appearances of richard winterton and his auctioneers on that show . i hope that i can get as much airtime as they do . slightly further up the a38 is the national memorial arboretum near alrewas — a wonderful venue , as the site of national remembrance . i advise every single person to make a visit there to remember , not just in november but on any day . i am sure that in the coming months the secretary of state for transport will grow tired of my lobbying about the need for a railway station to serve that amazing location . on a dissimilar note , the first travelodge in the uk was opened slightly up the road some 39 years ago , near the village of barton - under - needwood , although that village should be much better remembered as the home of the holland tug of war team . founded in 1970 , the team has represented england at numerous international tournaments , and even brought home a silver medal from the 2010 world open championships . it is to this constituency that i will return during the recess . i look forward to speaking to my constituents about transport , access to healthcare , education , health and care plans , and many other issues that are on their lips . i look forward to bringing those stories back to this place , so that i can continue to advocate on my constituents ’ behalf . i call edward morello to make his maiden speech . i am extremely honoured to be giving my maiden speech in a debate named after the late , great sir david amess . i am grateful for this opportunity . i thank all members who have given their maiden speeches today . i enjoyed the lot of them . it has been wonderful to learn about the many famous former residents of lichfield , and i wish i am the first non - conservative mp for west dorset in its 139 - year history — something i am extremely proud of . that notwithstanding , i will start by paying tribute to my conservative predecessor . chris loder ’s family has farmed west dorset for over 100 years , and he should be deservedly proud to have served as its mp . we are both successors to sir oliver letwin , an mp who was so well respected by the residents of west dorset that they would stop me at every opportunity to tell me what a fantastic constituency mp he was . i can only hope to leave this house as fondly remembered in the area as he is . although each of us has been proud to be the member for west dorset , we are not west dorset ’s proudest member . that honour goes to the cerne abbas giant , a 55 - metre - high chalk fertility symbol whose presence stands proud over the cerne valley for all to see . west dorset is the best constituency in the country . i know that for a fact because the towns of bridport , dorchester , lyme regis and sherborne have , at various times over the past few years , been described as the best towns in britain by no less an authority than the dorset echo , a newspaper that shares my unrivalled objectivity when it comes to the virtues of west dorset . west dorset is home to the world - famous jurassic coast , a unesco world heritage site , where mary anning helped to revolutionise our understanding of prehistoric life . she was long overlooked by historians , but her contribution is now recognised with a beautiful statue in her home town of lyme regis . at the other end of chesil beach is the fleet lagoon , the uk ’s largest saltwater lagoon , on which sits the abbotsbury swannery , which is home to over 600 swans and is a fantastic day out , especially if you love swans . as well as the swans , one can also see , rather incongruously , a prototype of barnes wallis ’s bouncing bomb . quite what the swans of abbotsbury thought about their home being used as a replica for the ruhr dams is still unknown . sadly , our beaches and rivers saw over 45,000 hours of sewage released into them last year . the river lim , which exits at lyme regis , was declared “ ecologically dead ” due to the levels of pollution in it . it is shameful that i and my family , before we go swimming at the nearby beach of west bay , must log on to the surfers against sewage app to check whether it is safe to swim . i committed during the campaign to using my seat in this house to pressure the government to take serious action on the issue of sewage , and i promise to do so . west dorset is hardy country . thomas hardy is renowned the world over for his poetry , and novels such as “ far from the madding crowd ” and “ tess of the d’urbervilles . ” his works famously deal with themes of melancholy , sadness and moral conflict — emotions that i am sure are familiar to members voting in the tory leadership contest . in his lifetime , he was also highly critical of the declining status afforded to rural britain . for even more than its beautiful towns and coastline , west dorset is a constituency defined by its countryside — a landscape managed and maintained by our farmers and food producers , who are the beating heart of our rural economy . we desperately need a national food and farming strategy that will deliver sustainable living for our farmers . far from being cut , the farming budget must be significantly increased if conversations about food security are ever to be anything other than fine words . as an environmentalist , i am delighted that we now have a government who seem to understand the importance of tackling the climate crisis and who recognise the vital part that renewable energy will play in achieving net zero . having spent a large part of my career in renewable energy , i will be urging the government to go further and faster if we are to avoid the worst ravages of the climate emergency , which is already unfolding . the liberal democrats will continue to champion the need for action in this house . on the subject of my party , i pay tribute to our party leader , my right hon . friend i knew then that it was not enough to stand on the sidelines and watch the country that i love so much be eaten by the self - interest of those who seek power only for power ’s sake or for self - enrichment . sadly , over the summer we saw that there are those who would seek to use the misery of people who have come here seeking refuge to further their own aims . i mention that because it will come as no surprise that the morellos are not originally from this island . the morellos of italy became the morellos of spain — with apologies to both countries for my pronunciation — before coming to britain at the beginning of the 20th century . one of my forebears died fighting in world war one for the country that adopted him , and is buried in a commonwealth war grave cemetery in northern france . my own father served in the royal navy . even more than morellos , my family are mazierskis . my maternal grandfather came here from poland at the end of the second world war , fleeing another type of political tyranny . he arrived as a child , speaking no english . he became an engineer and set up a building company . his children became nurses , teachers , artists and architects . his grandchildren are doctors , civil servants , lecturers and environmentalists , and one of them stands here today as a member of parliament . in my experience , immigrants do not forget the debt they owe the country that offered them a future . we must not let hate win . we must champion hope . that is why it is more important than ever to fly the flag for liberalism , liberal values and a rules - based international order . i would also like to mention my amazing wife . she is far , far cleverer than me and would make a far better politician . without her , i certainly would not be here today , not just because of the love and support she has shown me , but because it was her suggestion that i run in the first place — something i find myself reminding her of with increasing frequency . finally , i thank the voters of west dorset for putting their faith in me . it is a huge honour to represent them , and i look forward to doing everything i can to deliver a better deal for west dorset . rose — order . i think it would be a huge shame in the sir david amess adjournment debate to put a time limit on speeches . members can see how many are still standing , and i know that many would like to make their maiden speeches before we disappear on recess . perhaps members could think about restricting themselves to seven or eight minutes so that i can get everybody in this afternoon . i call connor rand to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for allowing me to make my maiden contribution in this debate . i pay tribute to the members on both sides of the house who have made their maiden contributions , including i am extremely proud to be the first labour member of parliament for altrincham and sale west , in no small part because of the brilliant team of local volunteers who worked on the campaign and the support of my wonderful friends and family . i also thank my constituency neighbour , my hon . friend at this early stage in my contribution , i want to pay tribute to my predecessor , lord brady , who represented the people of altrincham and sale west for 27 years . i thank him for his service to his constituents and for his kind words to me following my election . i think one of my constituents summed it up best . while i was knocking on doors in hale during the election campaign , a woman — and the whole house will be relieved to know that i will not attempt to impersonate her — said of lord brady , “ the thing about graham is that whether you agreed or disagreed with him , and frankly i usually disagreed with him , he was always unfailingly affable . ” i hope to one day be described by my constituents in a similar fashion . of course , as the result of a rather interesting few years for the conservative party , he might well come to be remembered as one as the more consequential chairs of the 1922 committee . i am sure the new chair , when i meet new members from all sides of this house and tell them i am fortunate enough to represent a constituency as beautiful as altrincham and sale west , in many cases i get a nagging sense from them that my mere presence in this house , representing where i do , is symptomatic not just of the level of change at the last general election , but of a labour party that is able to appeal to every part of our country and every section of society . however , the reality is that my constituency is extraordinarily diverse in almost every regard . within easy reach of the city of manchester , it is a place of business , thriving small and medium - sized enterprises and entrepreneurship — including the spectacular market in altrincham — but wythenshawe and trafford general hospitals are also major employers . it is an area with tens of churches , four synagogues and the altrincham and hale muslim association , and it is where many from hong kong have chosen to start a new life away from tyranny and repression . yes , it is a part of the world where many people are doing well for themselves and for their families , but it also has an estimated 3,000 children growing up in poverty . what unites the constituency and makes it such an extraordinary place is that it has such a strong sense of community , participation , and everyone pitching in to play their part . i have seen that at altrincham football club , a brilliant community club with amazing grassroots initiatives , and which in 2019 became the first team in england to wear a shirt inspired by the rainbow flag to show their support in the fight against homophobia . i have seen it from staff and volunteers at the garrick playhouse , who work tirelessly to put on a comprehensive series of plays and productions , and i have seen it at trafford south food bank , which works across the constituency to provide for people in need . it is able to do what it does thanks to the remarkably generous donations of local people . however , all too often , organisations such as that food bank are having to go above and beyond in the most challenging of circumstances to stop people falling through the cracks , because as a country we have failed to provide people with the security in work that they need ; we have failed to provide the economic stability and certainty that businesses need in order to invest ; and we have failed to address the long - term challenges our country faces . that is why labour was elected : to fix what has become broken , and to offer hope and renewal . that is why the people of altrincham and sale west sent me here : to cut waiting times across our national health service , including at wythenshawe and trafford general ; to clean up our badly polluted rivers and streams ; and to make sure people can feel safe on our streets by tackling crime and antisocial behaviour . having worked on a national campaign against the violence and abuse that shopworkers receive , i know how important it is that we clamp down on crime against public - facing workers , and i know that this government will act . having changed our party so that we could be given the extraordinary opportunity we have to change our country , that is the sort of tangible change to the lives of people in altrincham and sale west that we must achieve . i am looking forward to working to deliver that change in the years to come and showing how , even in difficult times , government can still be a force for good . that is the very least that the people of altrincham and sale west , and of our country , expect and deserve . it is an absolute pleasure to speak in this debate and to follow it is also a pleasure to speak in the debate named after sir david amess . my only sadness is that the many new members will not have the benefit of his wit and wisdom , unlike those of us who first came to this place earlier — in my case in 2017 . i particularly welcome as my new hon . friend yes , i spoke about the introduction of the energy profits levy back in 2022 , and although my front - bench position precludes me from speaking about that measure from the back benches , i take this opportunity to beg ministers in charge of the new taxation and licensing policy in the north sea to remember that people in my communities are very worried about their future in the oil and gas industry . as these changes are made , ministers should remember that local people — because of their livelihoods — and indeed those in communities in many part of this country , are watching and waiting , and they are worried . madam deputy speaker , i know you agree that west aberdeenshire and kincardine is the most beautiful constituency in the united kingdom , despite having heard so many members say the same about their part of the world . people across the world saw it in its full glory two years ago this week , when , after the death of her late majesty the queen at balmoral in the constituency , my constituents and people across our region turned out in their thousands to line the roads along royal deeside . i do not think anybody will forget the scenes of the horses and tractors lined up by the side of the road , and of local people paying tribute to one of their own , as she left for the very last time . on that day , people around the world saw what her late majesty saw and what her son , his majesty the king , continues to see : the majesty , magnificence and unspoilt beauty of north - east scotland . that is one of the reasons why there is such concern and worry about the plans for new energy infrastructure across the countryside in the constituency that i am proud to represent . tourism is so important to my constituents , and indeed wider north - east scotland , but the hospitality and hotel sectors have struggled . visitor numbers are good , but the cost of doing business has increased markedly over the last few years . energy prices , higher staff costs and the lack of workforce have all contributed to the difficult and challenging environment in which some of scotland ’s best hotels and restaurants continue to operate . when we were in government , we took action to protect hospitality businesses . in last year ’s autumn statement , we extended the 75 % business rates relief for firms in the retail , hospitality and leisure sector . that meant that £ 230 million extra would be sent to scotland due to this policy area being devolved , but the scottish government did not pass that on to the hospitality industry in scotland . hospitality venues in west aberdeenshire and kincardine , and indeed in the rest of scotland , suffered because of the mismanagement of the scottish public finances and , sadly , because of the ignorance in the scottish government of how best to support that vital sector . i very much hope that the situation changes , and that any support for hospitality in the coming budget will be passed on in full to the scottish businesses affected . hospitality brings me on to another sector of vital importance not just to west aberdeenshire and kincardine , but to the united kingdom : whisky . on my regular visits to local distilleries such as fettercairn and royal lochnagar , i have experienced at first hand the real quality produced by these world - recognised brands with world - class taste . whisky is important not just to my constituency , but to the united kingdom economy as a whole . it is our biggest food and drink export by a long way : 100 bottles of scotch whisky are exported on average every second from the united kingdom , with gross value added of £ 7.1 billion per annum , and it alone directly supports 66,000 jobs , so today i join the scotch whisky association in calling for this sector , which is iconic and economically so important , to be championed and listened to by those at the heart of government . let us redouble our efforts to reduce remaining tariffs worldwide , and let us protect whisky by ensuring a fair advertising landscape . let us introduce a duty freeze in the forthcoming budget , so that this world - leading scottish and british success story can grow still further . west aberdeenshire and kincardine , as well as being the most beautiful constituency , the energy powerhouse of the uk and the home of the finest whiskies , is also the breadbasket of the country . from cambus o’may cheese to the aberdeenshire highland beef farmed near banchory , and the farming of potatoes , cereals and malting barley across laurencekirk and the mearns , many of my constituents are directly or indirectly employed in the agriculture sector . it is the lifeblood that not only sustains our local rural economy but provides so much security in the national food supply chain , feeding our nation . my constituents are immensely proud of this , but it is not without its challenges . there is the challenge of persevering with producing and delivering food for this country , despite unpredictable weather and rising costs of energy and fertilizer . i echo the calls of the national farmers union scotland for annual ringfenced funding to support scottish farmers as they continue to deliver for our nation . it has been a great privilege to speak in this debate , and now that i sit on the other side of the house , it is a daily inspiration to see sir david ’s coat of arms looking down on us . i know that he , like us , would be working as hard as possible to ensure that we conservatives return to the other side of the house at the earliest available opportunity , in four or five years ’ time . i congratulate everybody in the house who has made their maiden speech today . they have spoken so passionately about their constituencies that i wish to visit them all , although i say to my hon . friend i am honoured to give my maiden speech today , and i do so in the mother of all parliaments with the greatest humility . i will never forget that the people of gillingham and rainham have sent me , a muslim woman , here and it is only with their authority and trust that i speak . it is a privilege that i will never take lightly , which is why i would also like to begin by paying tribute to sir david amess , who embodied everything it means to be a public servant ; i have learned a lot about him in the chamber today . i take this opportunity to acknowledge my predecessor , rehman chishti , who served his constituents faithfully over many years . rehman arrived in this country at six years of age not speaking a word of english , but with the support of a community and our schools and teachers , he was eventually called to the bar and then elected as an mp . he should be proud of his achievements in parliament , and i wish him well with whatever the future holds for him . his story could only really happen in the uk , and i know the feeling : it is the feeling that i could not make sense anywhere else . i could visit kenya , where my mother was born , or pakistan , where my father comes from , but the moment i uttered a single word or walked a few metres , anyone who would care to would know that i was not from there , because the only place i truly feel myself is my hometown . i am a child of gillingham and rainham , no matter how much a small minority might insist that i am not . i could say , “ i ’m a gillingham girl , i know i am , i ’m sure i am . ” and now that i have said that , i can return to the rainham end of the priestfield stadium with my head held high . it is that confidence that i want every child in my constituency to have , because opportunity is no good to a generation that feels so beaten down that they dare not look up . i want them to have confidence that they can set a course for their life and have the means to get there , or at least know how to make it possible . but that has to come from somewhere ; it has to start with someone . for me , it was my grandparents , the first generation of my family to emigrate to the uk . my grandfather worked on the railways and my grandmother was a fruit picker . they made gillingham and rainham their home and taught me that nothing is easy , that things have to be earned , and that when we work together — as a family , as workers , as a collective — we achieve more . they were my first political role models . it is because of my parents that i am standing here today . my father never stopped believing in me , and he did not want me to be held back by the same things in life that had held him back . before he sadly passed away in 2020 , he made me promise to not stop until i had made the change i wanted to see . i wish he were here to witness this today , but i know that with my mother ’s support — she is in the gallery — i can do just that , not by myself , but together with all my colleagues , our movement and the people of gillingham and rainham , with whom i make common cause . there is so much to build on . if the house has not already guessed , we are the home to the mighty gillingham football club . league one will be lucky to have us when we are good and ready . we also have medway maritime hospital , a pillar of our community , staffed by dedicated professionals who do an outstanding job under increasingly difficult circumstances . madam deputy speaker , i am not sure whether your privileges extend to a disney+ subscription , but if they do , please ensure that you watch “ shōgun ” , which is based on the life of will adams . he was born in gillingham and was the first englishman to navigate to japan in 1598 , and he later became a samurai . when we are not exporting military heroes , we are making them . gillingham and rainham has a proud military and naval history , sharing a former naval dockyard and the royal engineers with neighbouring constituencies . we face our challenges . from speaking to residents over the years , i know that a story of decline and disillusionment has become all too familiar , after years of neglect and a lack of hope . the worst of it is that it is not unknown . it is not a new insight ; this has been spoken of many times in this house and the other place . it is said , it is forgotten , and we move on . over time , feeling hopeless is the only rational response left to the public . i hear it at first hand from countless residents , who are worried whether their children will have the same opportunities they had growing up , and whether our community will continue to thrive in the years to come . those concerns are not unique to gillingham and rainham , but are deeply felt by the people i represent . it is my duty to ensure that their voice is heard in this house and that their needs are met by our government , so that we can not only rebuild trust in our politics , but once again proudly say that this country is a place where anyone , regardless of background , can succeed . that is why i welcome the government ’s pledge to improve children ’s speaking skills as a helpful step to breaking down class barriers . it is those values that underpin my politics , and it is my experience that will drive my work as a member of parliament . having a place to call home should be a fundamental right . working for more than a decade in the housing industry , and most recently for the homelessness charity st mungo ’s , has taught me that how someone accesses housing impacts everything , from their physical and mental health to their life chances . that is why i will always champion my constituents ’ right to good - quality , genuinely affordable homes . that work was started in my constituency by the late alderman paul harriott , who also recognised that housing is more than just having a roof over your head . i will work tirelessly to improve our local healthcare services . the pressures on our nhs are immense , and it is vital that we secure the necessary resources and support to ensure that everyone has access to the best possible healthcare . the regeneration of our high streets is a matter of great concern to my constituents , so i will advocate for policies that support small businesses , encourage investment and help to restore the vitality of our town centres , just like the love gillingham initiative that i proudly announced only last week . finally , i want to acknowledge the incredible sense of community in my constituency . whether it is neighbours looking out for one another , volunteers working to support the most vulnerable or local groups coming together to tackle common challenges , it is clear that people care deeply about their community and each other . as their representative , i pledge to work in that same spirit of co - operation and compassion . i will listen to the people i serve , and i will fight for their interests in this house . the challenges we face are significant , but i am confident that together we can start to rebuild gillingham and rainham . i call danny chambers to make his maiden speech . thank you madam deputy speaker . that was an interesting maiden speech ; it is clear how passionate you are — sorry , madam deputy speaker , i will get this right . practising as a veterinary surgeon has been deeply rewarding . despite the 3 am calvings , visiting colics in the middle of the night and euthanising much - loved family pets , it was the perfect job for someone who grew up on a farm and loved science at school . i was relieved when i got elected that my first job as an mp was still within my comfort zone : i was asked to judge the dog show at meonstoke village fair . as i knock on a lot of doors — all of us do — one of the most common questions i get asked is , “ is it true that vets can treat humans as well ? ” i always answer , “ yes , vets can treat humans , but once we ’ve taken your temperature , people tend not to ask a second time . ” [ laughter . ] although being a vet is a fulfilling career , it is also stressful . it may surprise the house to learn that vets have a suicide rate that is about four times the national average . i have long been determined to do something about that . along with one of my good friends , sarah brown , we set up a support group for veterinary professionals that now has more than 19,000 members . unfortunately , my friend sarah lost her battle with depression , so i took her place as a trustee of the charity vetlife , which supports the mental health of the uk veterinary profession . not only does vetlife have a 24 - hour helpline for people who are struggling , but we immediately refer anyone who is at crisis point with their mental health . i am sure the whole house is aware that , at the moment , a person who goes to their gp in crisis may have to wait months , even more than a year , to get the specialist healthcare they need . i am sure we all agree that is not good enough . it is not only veterinary surgeons who are at high risk of mental health issues . other groups need proactive support for their mental health , including military veterans , women in the 12 months after giving birth , farmers , the lgbt community and people struggling with debt . living in poverty makes people vulnerable to the desperate cycle of payday loan companies and credit card debt , which not only puts strain on family relationships but saps the joy from life and contributes towards our mental health crisis . my experience , which is probably shared by all members when they knock on doors , is that one of the most common subjects brought up is the struggle of parents to access mental health care for children and teenagers whose education and social development was hugely disrupted by the pandemic . parents are worried sick about that . i am proud that the lib dems have said for years that mental health should be treated with the same importance as physical health . we are heartened that the government reaffirmed that in the king ’s speech . the winchester constituency has seen slight boundary changes , having incorporated some of the meon valley , so my constituents were served by two mps in the last parliament . i pay tribute to steve brine , who was also chair of the health and social care committee , and flick drummond . i thank them for all the hard work they did over the years for the people of my constituency . winchester was once one of the ancient capitals of england . it is steeped in history . king alfred the great famously defended the city from viking attacks in the ninth century , fortifying winchester and leading a series of successful campaigns . he eventually secured a decisive victory in the battle of edington in 878 , and that victory marked the beginning of the unification of england under his rule . the city is home to the magnificent winchester cathedral , which has stood as the symbol of the city ’s religious and cultural significance for over a millennium . we also have one of the oldest newspapers in the country , the hampshire chronicle , which is still very popular and very well read . although we are proud of our rich history , we are also a forward - looking community , keenly aware of our role in the world and our responsibility to the future . to that end , we are striving to become an official city of sanctuary for refugees , having welcomed so many from ukraine and other areas of the world troubled by conflict . organisations such as winchester action on climate crisis — winacc — are also working tirelessly to ensure that winchester plays our part in combating global climate change . the river itchen flows right through the heart of our city , and the river meon through the meon valley—[interruption . ] i must apologise ; i seem to have contracted kennel cough—[laughter . ] these rare chalk streams support unique ecosystems so precious that the itchen has been designated as a site of special scientific interest , and we hope the meon will soon receive that same accreditation . allowing sewage and other pollutants to be dumped in these rivers is nothing short of ecological vandalism . climate change , pandemics , antimicrobial resistance , and how we feed 8 billion people and give them energy sustainably — these are daunting challenges , but we must face them because they are existential threats to our civilisation . but they are also economic opportunities ; the technology and expertise required to address them are opportunities for economic growth , and the uk has the potential to be a world leader in this area . no single country can address these issues alone , and to find lasting solutions , we need a united effort from governments , research institutes , universities , scientists , engineers , businesses and tech start - ups worldwide . we have learned over the last few years that , whether dealing with pandemics or climate change , the human and economic costs are enormous when our political leaders ignore scientists and experts . my upbringing and my state school education gave me the opportunity to have an enjoyable and fulfilling career , but i am also aware that i was privileged . i always had a roof over my head , i had a stable family life , i never went to school hungry and my mother , who is here today , is a former teacher and used to read to us every night — i vividly remember the day she quite angrily said , “ i am not reading ‘ danny the champion of the world ’ to you one more time . ” but many children today are not so fortunate , and the increasing number of children growing up in poverty lack the opportunities i had . although these are complex issues , we can begin addressing them by providing free school meals to all children who are hungry to ensure that every child can reach their full potential . had i gone to school hungry , it is very unlikely i would have become a veterinary surgeon , and even less likely that i would be standing here as a member of parliament . i will miss treating animals on a daily basis , although some of my colleagues have said to me , “ it is fantastic for animal welfare that you have been elected to parliament , because it means you will be spending less time in the veterinary clinic . ” but i think i am going to have a bigger impact on animal welfare here than i ever could in clinical practice . my goals include updating the outdated veterinary surgeons act 1966 to make it fit for the 21st century . we also need to address issues such as puppy smuggling , which are not only an animal welfare issue but a human health risk , bringing the risk of importing rabies , brucella canis and other diseases that affect the human population . i also want to support our british farmers in upholding our high animal welfare standards , and to ensure that those are not compromised in future trade deals . it is not only vets and farmers who are proud of our high animal welfare standards but the british public , and we must not compromise them . i thank my team of volunteers , many of whom are here today , who worked so hard not only during the general election campaign but in the transition to setting up a constituency office . they have been fantastic . while we have been recruiting for permanent members of staff , they have done over 800 pieces of casework , supporting our local community . i thank my family and my partner , emma . i pay tribute to my father , who is no longer with us . our family had the heartbreaking experience of caring for him as he declined due to dementia . i know there are many people in winchester , hampshire and throughout the country who are experiencing the same situation with their loved ones . it is the honour of my life to serve as winchester ’s mp . i will continue to stand up and fight for our local nhs services and our local hospital services . i thank everyone who put their faith in me and my team . we will not let you down . i call tristan osborne to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i congratulate i believe that david amess would be proud of this parliament and proud of the speeches given . i pay tribute to i would like to place on record my thanks to the house staff for the welcome and support they have given all new members over the last few weeks , especially as there are so many of us this time : the table office , the speaker ’s office , the doorkeepers , security and , as a former teacher , a special thanks to the education support assistants who do such outstanding work on tours . yesterday , i had the great pleasure of meeting a mr o’sullivan , who is shortly to depart the education centre to go into teaching . i wish him all the best in that pursuit . preparation for this speech has not been without trepidation , and i have had a significant amount of advice from members , former members , siblings , partners and former students alike . one piece of advice was to treat it like a wedding speech : tread carefully to keep both sides of the aisle happy and always remember to speak highly of your elders . that was until i was reminded that , as i am in my mid-40s , i am possibly one of those elders , given how the age differential has changed . another piece of advice , from a former member , was to always keeps the whips happy . hear , hear ! on that note , second only to bridgend , chatham and aylesford is one of the most beautiful constituencies in the country . [ laughter . ] created in 1997 from the previous rochester and chatham , mid kent , and tonbridge and malling seats , we have a rich legacy of excellent and outspoken parliamentarians , including dame peggy fenner , andrew rowe , julian critchley , jonathan shaw and the remarkable dame tracey crouch . what can i say ? dame tracey is well known for her warm personality and diligence . she is engaging , and her constituents spoke well of her on the doorstep and in the 14 years she represented the area . i am also reliably informed that , unlike me , she had a legendary involvement in the parliamentary football team . i am reliably informed , again , that her tackling skills were well known , and that no one ever tried to take the ball from her when she was in full flight . on a serious note , she has done outstanding work on the football fan - led review , she led on anti - gambling legislation when she was in the department for culture , media and sport , and she has left a deeply inspiring legacy for young women in sport in particular . i salute her record and her fortitude . my constituents embody aspiration and determination . although i was raised in the city of medway , i have been actively involved in chatham since 2001 . it is a dynamic and diverse area , with hard - working , direct and down - to - earth people . the constituency is truly beautiful , with stunning panoramic views from blue bell hill over the weald of kent . on a clear day one can see many other constituencies , including tonbridge , sevenoaks , maidstone and malling and canterbury , and many walkers and hikers find entertainment along the historic pilgrims ’ way . the seat also contains some of the earliest human settlement history , with the megalithic structures of kit ’s coty harking back to neolithic times . it is identified with numerous artefacts of historical significance , although i must say to the part of my constituency that will be most familiar to members is chatham , whose historic legacy is known across the world . its significance as a commissioned dockyard has been recognised globally , and its long - standing naval tradition dates back to henry viii and the tudor period . the area retained that naval link until the 1980s , when the dockyard was closed , and it still has that proud naval tradition . i am reliably informed that the resolute desk in the oval office , in the heart of western democracy , came from hms resolute , which was constructed and supported in chatham , and many of our finest naval traditions have come from that location . chatham and aylesford does , however , face significant challenges . many areas , particularly urban chatham , experience poverty , and , according to figures from the house of commons library , 17 % of children are living in poverty . issues such as crime and antisocial behaviour have been exacerbated by cuts in neighbourhood policing and early intervention programmes . i am committed to working with all our communities to address those challenges . , and it is on that note that i want to pay particular tribute to many of the charities and other organisations that serve my local community . they include the arches project in luton , the dementia awareness groups , street angels , royal british legion industries and our poppy appeal volunteers , who go out every year to collect funds for veterans and our military community . i believe that community wealth building should be central to our approach to government . by focusing on wealth creation , we can drive and support local businesses and revitalise our town centres . my hon . friend in recent weeks i have heard many inspiring speeches from new members , but what unites us all is a shared ambition to effect positive change for our communities and our country . i am honoured to serve , and i pledge to work across party lines to ensure economic security and improvements in our public services — and i will do so in a friendly , open and approachable way . the government must of course deal with the £ 22 billion in - year deficit , and we must work to secure our economic prosperity to ensure that all our people , especially our young people , have the skills that will give them a future . i am deeply honoured to represent the constituents of chatham and aylesford . rose — order . before members make their contributions , they may wish to bear in mind that i will be calling the front benchers at 4.45 pm . it is a great honour to be called to speak in the sir david amess adjournment debate . let me first refer members to my registered interests before i make some points about my constituency . there have been many maiden speeches this afternoon — the greatest tradition of the house — and i congratulate we also heard from many of us are not new members , but we are new to parts of our constituencies , and it is right that we gallop around our constituencies in the way that sir david amess did , so that you are happy with us , madam deputy speaker . i shall try to do that in the finest of his traditions . one thing i share with sir david amess is that i have owned a westminster dog of the year ; in fact , the reigning westminster dog of the year . i have given back the trophy , and the battle will be back on — it is tj ’s trophy right now . i am the first member for east grinstead and uckfield . parts of my constituency were previously in the horsham constituency , which the right honourable sir jeremy quin represented , and in the lewes constituency , which maria caulfield represented . both were assiduous members of parliament who were dedicated to causes and very effective . i feel the pressure of following in their footsteps in my constituency , which is very rural . it has parts of lewes and wealden , and 50 % or thereabouts of the mid sussex district . i wish if we are to talk about assisted dying , we also need to talk about dying well and living well , and i urge the government to look at hospice funding in the wider discussion about the nhs that we have had today . uckfield hospital needs further support and my local gp services , which are run by modality , are struggling in crawley down , east grinstead and parts of burgess hill , as they are elsewhere . indeed , i have heard in the last few weeks that the balcombe surgery needs further support . our local gps do a fabulous job , and it is important that we support them in the wider nhs . roads and potholes have been perennial issues in my inbox ; i am sure that new members have found the same . we have issues with traffic lights , queues and royal mail deliveries in slaugham , pease pottage and uckfield . these problems are getting on constituents ’ nerves , so we need to tackle them . there are some amazing local businesses in my constituency . tim haynes is a second - generation florist in pease pottage and serves his customers diligently . as in many communities , many of our businesses are small , rural and family - led , and they include farming . i have correspondence in my inbox about education , health and care plans ; send provision ; and special school places . this is a very difficult area for many of my constituents , and we face increasing diagnoses and challenges . as the government look to charge vat on fees for independent schools , i ask that they consider the impact on children without ehcps who are being supported in independent schools . a significant proportion of pupils in my constituency attend independent schools , and parents are very worried about the impact of any changes on their children . what happens going forward must be fair to all children . turning to some positives , i recently attended the queen victoria hospital and the planting of a maple tree to celebrate the 80th anniversary of the canadian wing and the work of the plastic surgeons in the town that does n’t stare . i thank the team who welcomed me recently to the citizens advice bureau in uckfield , which is a wonderful town . they work hard to support many rural residents in an area where poverty is not seen and noticed as it is in other areas . burgess hill academy , blackthorns community primary academy and lindfield primary academy are having a particular issue with general annual grant pooling by the university of brighton academies trust . some 14 schools are part of that group , and those local schools are seeing an impact on their day - to - day budgets . i implore the government and the trust to work with local mps to make sure that the support that is being given for pupils actually lands in the laps of teachers and students . that worries me greatly . finally , i pay tribute to my predecessor , sir nicholas soames . he called me “ mimsey ” and his constituent . he was supportive , bombastic , warm and strident . he always stuck up for commuters and for casework being of the highest order . we all seek to continue in his fine tradition of standing up for those who go to work , work hard and live in our constituencies . if we are lucky enough to be sent here , a legacy such as his — like that of sir david — is one that we aspire to . i thank all hon . members for their wonderful maiden speeches , especially my hon . friend it is an honour to speak in the sir david amess adjournment debate . the warmth and respect with which he is spoken about is a measure of the gentleman . my contribution is neither light - hearted nor happy . the news that grangemouth will stop refining oil in quarter 2 of 2025 is devastating . it is accurate to say that the mood music from the refinery owners has been pessimistic for some time , but even with the threat of closure that has been hanging over the refinery , today ’s news is shocking . what is happening will be felt far beyond grangemouth . it will reverberate around scotland , northern ireland and the north of england — the areas of the uk that grangemouth primarily services . its closure will have an impact on all the constituencies there . i will give a brief history . some 100 years ago , grangemouth was the perfect location for a refinery . there was an abundance of flat land , a bustling harbour and , crucially , an already skilled workforce that was experienced in shale refining . it was one of the first crude oil refineries in the uk . it is currently the primary supplier of aviation fuel for scotland ’s main airports and a major supplier of petrol and diesel ground fuels across the central belt of scotland . it also provides power to the forties oil pipeline , bringing oil and gas ashore from the north sea . although operations and procedures have changed over the century , a highly skilled local workforce remains a constant . i could detail the statistics about how the grangemouth site contributes 4 % of scotland ’s gdp and is a key piece of scottish infrastructure , but while that is accurate and pertinent when talking about the refinery , i want to talk about the human side of the issue . when the refinery was known locally as “ the bp ” , there were social clubs and gala events for families . grangemouth was known as scotland ’s boom town . the refinery , and specifically the workers , created a community that was industrious and working class , where the jobs were dangerous , skilled and highly valued . the grangemouth refinery provided apprenticeships to local people , and the possibility to gain the experience and world - class qualifications that provided the opportunity of forging a career , a platform for self - improvement , and social mobility . for those of us who represent constituencies with social issues , which are often born out of industry leaving those communities , social mobility has become a negative journey , not a positive one . the comparison with the miners of four decades ago is clear . and like the miners of the 1980s who kept britain warm , the refinery workers of grangemouth keep britain moving . what happened to the miners can not be the fate of grangemouth refinery workers . over the past few months , the campaign to keep grangemouth working has spread the message of extending the life of the refinery , investing in the workforce and making sure there is no gap that would see workers lose their jobs . i have stood in solidarity with the refinery workers , and i will continue to do so . unite the union has said that it does not accept that the future of the refinery “ should have been left to the whim and avarice of shareholders . ” i completely agree . energy security is intrinsically linked to national security , and for both to be in the hands of a foreign government and private capital is inherently wrong , not to mention utterly reckless . the primary ideal of the keep grangemouth working campaign is to extend the life of the refinery so that a truly just transition can be achieved . that is what should happen , and nothing will convince me otherwise . oil will still be part of the energy mix for a while yet , and the refinery workers know that . they also know that oil will not last forever . they know that cleaner industries must come , and they tell me that they want to be part of a new green industrial revolution . they have so many of the skills that will be required for us to achieve net zero and make britain a clean energy superpower , but if there is a gap between refining stopping next year and these new industries being ready , the truth is that the workforce will be gone . workers can not hang around and wait , because mortgages need to be paid and families need to be fed . jobs must be found or talent will leave . the impact on the local community and the local economy would be enormous . the shops , the pubs , the restaurants , the hotels , the cafés , the bed and breakfasts and the snack vans would all suffer if the refinery were to close . as a government , we must do everything we can . i welcome the steps that the secretary of state and his team have taken with the announcement of £ 20 million of funding to support the community and its workers by investing in local energy projects to create new growth for grangemouth . i have previously spoken positively about project willow and the importance of it being a joint commitment between both governments to determine what the industrial future of grangemouth will be , because both the uk government and the scottish government will need to work together . the new working relationship that this labour government have with the scottish government has already shown its worth . i know how hard the secretary of state has worked during the intensive discussions with the refinery owners to secure tailored support for the workers who are impacted and , along with his counterpart in the scottish government , to devise a plan that will help to secure grangemouth ’s industrial future and protect the workforce . i thank them both for showing what can be achieved when both governments work together , but it is just a start . this labour government have done more on this issue in eight weeks than the conservative government did in 14 years . today ’s news , although shocking , has been coming . truthfully , project willow or the like should have been done and delivered years ago . the workers and the grangemouth community need action that leads to us creating something truly transformative and world leading at grangemouth . sustainable aviation fuels , low - carbon hydrogen and clean e - fuels — let us not rule anything out of the equation for the grangemouth site . but we must act quickly , because time is of the essence . if we are to have a truly just transition , one that looks after workers and their communities , we must move with purpose and speed on determining the industrial future of the grangemouth site . and grangemouth must continue refining until these new energies are ready . there has been an environmental need for a green industrial revolution for a long time , and it has been discussed for ages , but now we see the social need for a transition to clean energy , and the need for that has been incredibly accelerated today . i call helen maguire to make her maiden speech . thank you for calling me to make my maiden speech , madam deputy speaker . i congratulate it is with immense pride and honour that i stand here today to give my maiden speech as the first ever female and first ever liberal democrat member of parliament for epsom and ewell , which also includes the towns of ashtead and leatherhead . this moment is not just about my election victory , but part of a long journey of progress that started with brave women like emily wilding davison , a suffragette who gave her life for the cause of women ’s rights . in 1911 , she famously hid within the walls of this very building , the palace of westminster , to declare it her residence on the night of the census . just two years later , she made the ultimate sacrifice , losing her life at the epsom derby while campaigning for women ’s suffrage . it is remarkable that today , 101 years after her passing , we now have 263 women in this parliament , more than ever before . that progress is a testament to her legacy and the relentless efforts of organisations such as 50:50 parliament , whose support in getting me here i am personally grateful for . i am delighted that there is now progress towards establishing a women ’s caucus in parliament . i want to take this opportunity to congratulate lord grayling , my predecessor , on his move to the other place , and to thank him for his 23 years of dedicated service to epsom and ewell . his service to the community is well recognised , and i look forward to building upon that work , while bringing fresh perspectives and new energy to our local and national challenges . the community of epsom and ewell prides itself on strong local values , resilience , and a rich sporting and creative history . it is home to the world - famous epsom derby . we have the university for the creative arts , laine theatre arts and many sporting clubs , including three running clubs and two football clubs . it has several vibrant economic hubs , with many successful businesses , large and small . but it is the people who make my constituency special . whether it is our small businesses , voluntary groups or the diverse families who have made the area their home , epsom and ewell represents the best of what a community can be when it works together . epsom and ewell is a beautiful place , blessed with remarkable green spaces and historical significance . we are fortunate to have three sites of special scientific interest : ashtead common , priest hill and stones road pond . we also have beautiful green spaces , such as horton and nonsuch parks , epsom downs and the surrey hills , an area of outstanding natural beauty . one site that holds special meaning for many is langley vale , which was used to train over 8,000 soldiers during the first world war and where lord kitchener famously inspected the troops . today , it stands as a centenary wood , a place of reflection with beautiful sculptures honouring our military past . as someone who proudly served in the army , in the royal military police , i am deeply moved by our community ’s ties to the armed forces . my own military experience includes serving in iraq during operation telic iv in 2004 , where i was responsible for retraining and mentoring the iraqi police force in maysan province . it was a volatile and dangerous region at that time and it was not an easy tour . we came under fire on a regular basis and it was made harder with the knowledge that , just a year before my arrival , six of my rmp colleagues were killed in majar al - kabir . the coroner found that they had been given inadequate radios and ammunition , so it was no surprise that we were given more ammo and weapons when i arrived . i want to ensure that our armed forces continue to have the right resources to stay safe in their duties as this government conduct their spending review . i hope the secretary of state for defence will bear in mind the effect that cuts can have in the field . lord darzi ’s report about the nhs was published today , so it is apt that i share a personal experience that underscores my commitment to improving healthcare services in epsom and ewell . in 2007 , my six - week - old son suddenly turned blue in front of me , while a health visitor was visiting . i called 999 . it was a terrifying moment , and before i knew what was going on , my living room was packed with paramedics and there was equipment everywhere . i was told to pack a bag and shortly afterwards we arrived at a&e. the crash team was there and my baby boy was surrounded by 20 consultants trying to figure out what was wrong . i stood there looking on , helpless . the doctors managed to stabilise my son and moved him to the amazing evelina hospital , just over the river from parliament , as they did not have the specialist equipment needed . he went into the paediatric intensive care unit . every bit of his skin , even his head , was covered by some sort of patch or monitor to try to establish what was going on . the consultant informed us that he had bronchiolitis and that it would be touch and go that evening . thankfully , my son survived the night and we spent over a week in intensive care , as the amazing doctors worked to save his life from bronchiolitis . i saw at first hand the critical importance of high - quality emergency care . it is my mission to make sure that the residents of epsom , ewell , ashtead and leatherhead have access to the best possible healthcare . our community was promised one of the 40 new hospitals . that commitment must be fulfilled . we are part of the epsom and st helier university hospitals nhs trust . st helier hospital is struggling , with crumbling facilities and overstretched staff . we have fewer hospital beds per capita than in many other nations . ceilings are falling in and buildings are condemned . the need for a new hospital is urgent , and i look forward to discussing it with the secretary of state for health and social care in the coming weeks . the house will be pleased to know that my son is now a big , strong 16 - year - old , challenging his parents as every teenager does . epsom and ewell is home to two significant rivers : the hogsmill , a relatively pristine chalk river whose beauty was immortalised by sir john everett millais in his iconic painting “ ophelia ” ; and the river mole , which is one of the most polluted in the country . thames water ’s negligent handling of our water resources has led to more than 8,000 hours of sewage discharge into the river mole in the first six months of this year alone . thames water is crippled by being billions in debt , and water bills keep rising . executive bonuses are handed out as the sewage is pouring out . this mismanagement of our water is unacceptable . i call for greater regulation and accountability and for a sewage tax to protect our rivers and water infrastructure . epsom and ewell has affluent areas , but we also face stark social inequalities . there are parts of my constituency in which food banks have become a lifeline for struggling families , and our local housing waiting list has grown to more than 1,300 households . food banks are not the norm ; they are a sign that society simply is not working . i am concerned that even more of my constituents will be using them this winter as they struggle without the winter fuel allowance . the stark contrast between wealth and deprivation is a reminder that we must do more to support those who are most in need . i am incredibly grateful for the work of the good company , the leatherhead community hub , local faith organisations and all the volunteers and local charities who work tirelessly to provide for our community ’s most vulnerable . as the member of parliament for epsom and ewell — a constituency that stretches from worcester park and stoneleigh in the north to ashtead and leatherhead , the gateway of the surrey hills , in the south — i want our community to thrive economically , socially and environmentally . my constituency has inspired literary greats such as c. s. lewis and jane austen . i believe that it can continue to be a place of innovation and inspiration . i thank my parents for their support throughout the years . i thank my husband and three kids for their support and their leafleting prowess throughout my campaign . most importantly , i thank my constituents for placing their trust in me . i am committed to repaying their trust with service , dedication and determination to make epsom and ewell a better place for everyone . i call kevin mckenna to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for calling me to address the house for my first speech , and for making time available for so many of us to make our first speech today . i particularly congratulate in passing , i must mention lord darzi ’s report , which my right hon . friend the health secretary presented to the house today — not because of the content of the report , but because in 2015 i was honoured to become a darzi fellow . lord darzi set up his fellowship programme to bring clinicians like me , a nurse , into clinical leadership , to ensure that the nhs and the health system are led by clinicians . i am not sure that the plan was to get us all into the houses of parliament , but i am the first darzi fellow here and i think there will be quite a few more . i am honoured to speak in this debate in memory of sir david amess , whose constituency of southend west can be seen from mine of sittingbourne and sheppey — we see the beautiful vista of southend , which is now a city , across the thames . over the past few months , during the campaign and afterwards , there have been several times when i have looked over at southend and taken a moment to reflect on the manner and the tragedy of sir david ’s death and what it means for all of us serving here in the house . it is a great blessing of my constituency that , amid our busy , traffic - laden towns , we have these beautiful vistas down the thames and the medway estuary . we have broad , flat salt marshes meeting big skies — places that you can escape to and properly reflect on everything that matters in life . during the election campaign , i asked my constituents what they valued most in the constituency , and it was that proximity to nature that kept coming up . they mentioned the wide - open estuary waters of the thames and medway — several of my medway colleagues are in their places today — the many sites of special scientific interest and the nature reserve at elmley . now that members are spending time in london , they might want to pop down for a hot yoga weekend — it ’s a whole thing . however — so many members have said something similar when describing their seat — that is only half the story . the other half is the still proudly industrial town of sittingbourne . its character and location challenge many people ’s preconceptions of kent . sittingbourne ’s twin on the isle of sheppey , sheerness - on - sea , has busy docks — docks that , hopefully , will become only busier as the opportunities for growth , construction and new green industries are realised by this government . sittingbourne and sheppey is perfectly located to take advantage of all that development . my job is not only to argue for our place in the rebuilding of britain , but to ensure that my constituents see real social , economic , health and wellbeing benefits from the opportunities . the factors that led to the foundations of our towns being laid centuries ago fit the way that technological , industrial and transport strategies are all pointing now . sittingbourne straddles the main road from dover to london and is connected directly by water , road and rail to sheerness docks on sheppey . this is what made the saxon kings of kent grab the land and claim it as their terra regis . this is something that the residents of milton regis are very proud to remind me of — that it is a royal town in the middle of sittingbourne . it was those same routes that allowed the town of queenborough to develop as a major port . tucked behind sheppey is the safe waterway — and major trading route — from london through to the continent and the rest of the world . those routes are also what enabled sittingbourne to develop a major brick - building industry in the 19th century . it produced more bricks and had more people working in it than the potteries in staffordshire . those bricks were largely used to build london . many town houses in the 19th century , buckingham palace and many of the buildings on this parliamentary estate will have been built with the clay and bricks from sittingbourne . our water and transport gives us the opportunity to produce green energy and bring about greener ways of travelling . that will benefit sittingbourne and sheerness in the future . peel ports at sheerness is a major importer of construction materials for the south of england . with investment to restore our rail freight links and an ambition to once again use our water routes , we can be at the heart of a green revolution . but there is more to a place than land and water . a place is made by people . what will ensure that the people of my constituency get the benefits that they are crying out for as a result of growth and rebuilding is the strength of our local communities and the collective action that comes from grassroots organisations . as we move more services out of hospitals to the community and try to mend the broken sense of cohesion in our society , these community actors will be key . there are great organisations , including seashells nursery in sheerness , which holds true to the course taken by sure start centres , with their now proven benefits , although they are sadly under threat of closure , and wiggles children ’s nursery , which has partnered with sheppey ’s range rovers football club to create a multi - generational facility that will massively boost the health of the neighbourhood . there are also people coming together , on the island and the mainland , to form progressive men ’s mental health peer support groups , including men - talk . uk in sheppey and sittingbourne . a team of volunteers resurrected the sittingbourne carnival this year after several years ’ gap to ensure that its tradition of more than 130 years does not die , but instead will go from strength to strength . there is swale food bank , and underpinning so many of the voluntary organisations in my constituency is swale community and voluntary services , which fosters lots of organisations , helping them to get started , get organising and help their communities . part of the reason for that depth of community co - operation is that my constituency faces the challenge of having some of the most deprived parts of kent and the south - east . unfortunately , a big driver for that is the very geography that otherwise brings in so many benefits and opportunities . as sheppey is an island , with only one point in the west that connects to the rest of england , there are pockets of isolation , and when the two bridges go down , as sadly they have all too often of late , people can not get off sheppey to go to work or school , or on to sheppey to deliver services in sheppey ’s hospitals , schools , docks and three prisons . all that impacts not just sheppey but sittingbourne and the surrounding villages . both my predecessors worked to overcome those entrenched challenges . i pay tribute to my immediate predecessor , gordon henderson , who many here know well , for his work persuading his party when they were in power to invest in technical skills training on the island and expand sheppey college . my labour predecessor , derek wyatt , secured the funding for a permanent fixed bridge to the island , the sheppey crossing , to overcome the problems of the old kingsferry bridge , which is only a few metres away and has to be raised several times a day to let ships through , to link the paper mills and the docks . both of them believed in the enormous potential of the area , but there is a lot more to do . it is a professional habit of intensive care nurses that we are inveterate fiddlers and fixers . we like to help people , and we like to keep busy doing so . now that i have swapped adjusting ventilator settings and syringe drivers for work in public policy , however , i need to find new ways to keep busy . i will keep working with people in sittingbourne and sheppey to bring them together , and will work collaboratively at trying to fix things for the better , but there is one thing in the constituency that i assure you , madam deputy speaker , i will not be fiddling with : the ss richard montgomery , a wrecked world war two cargo ship sunk just off sheerness , which is packed with something like 1,400 tonnes of high explosives . most experts feel that as long as the ship is not disturbed , the seawater will gradually inactivate those explosives , so if they are ever disturbed enough to trigger , any fireworks would be minor . however , there is a minority view that if something triggered all the explosives to go off at once , the resulting explosion would not just inundate the whole of sittingbourne and sheppey but send a 5 - metre tsunami back up the thames , all the way to central london , swamping the palace of westminster — giving us all very wet feet , and most of the mps in the south - east and london an awful lot of extra casework . finally , i thank my constituents again for putting their faith in me ; the campaigners and activists who helped me to get elected ; my parents and siblings , who have always shown how proud they are of me ; and most of all , my husband lee , who i could not have got this far in life without , and who is a true partner to me in everything that we do . i call manuela perteghella to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to make my maiden speech . i thank all hon . members for their fine contributions , including my hon . friend it is the greatest honour of my life to serve the people of stratford - on - avon . i am humbled to have been elected to represent the place that i call home , where i live and where i have raised my family , who are here today in the public gallery . i am proud to be the first liberal mp for our constituency in over a century , and the first woman ever to be elected to this role . i extend my heartfelt thanks to the people of stratford , alcester , studley , shipston , henley , bidford and the many villages and hamlets that make up our beautiful constituency . i thank them for placing their trust in me . i promise to be their champion , and a strong and unwavering voice for everyone , fighting every day for the fair deal that they deserve . i pay tribute to my predecessor , nadhim zahawi , who was mp for stratford - on - avon for the last 14 years . during his political career he covered many important roles in the cabinet , but i thank him in particular for his work as vaccines minister during the covid pandemic . i also acknowledge the service of the late john maples , who represented stratford - on - avon with distinction from 1997 to 2010 , before being elevated to the other place . he was both well liked and greatly admired . although i am proud to be the first female mp for stratford - on - avon , i am not the first to bring italian heritage to the role . that distinction belongs to another of my predecessors , john profumo , who beat me to it — although i plan on a much quieter stay in the history books . my constituency is one of the most beautiful areas of our country , with luscious woodland such as the heart of england forest , valleys lapped by rivers and brooks , and fertile farmland — a landscape special as only the warwickshire countryside can be . my connection to my constituency is one of deep love . i love the stretches from shipston - on - stour and the rolling cotswolds fringes in the south , to the avon valley villages and henley - in - arden in the north , where the majestic forest of arden once stood . at the heart of my constituency lies the town of stratford - upon - avon , celebrated worldwide as the birthplace of the greatest playwright of all : william shakespeare . each year on william ’s birthday , the town remembers and celebrates its most famous son , with civic dignitaries and local schoolchildren parading through the historic streets to lay flowers on his tomb in holy trinity church . i look forward to joining them next april . what makes our constituency special above all is its people , who are resilient and community minded . each town and village is blessed with warm - hearted volunteers helping in repair cafés , food banks , the community speed watch and flood action groups . there are outstanding places of learning , such as our local schools and colleges , the shakespeare institute of the university of birmingham , and the university of warwick ’s innovation campus ; national portfolio organisations such as the royal shakespeare company and the shakespeare birthplace trust ; as well as grassroots arts companies such as the bear pit theatre and escape arts . events such as the shipston proms celebrate the wealth of musical talent . most of all , we are a constituency of entrepreneurs and innovators , businesses and social enterprises . overlooked by beaudesert castle — known locally as “ the mount”—the town of henley - in - arden has a timber - framed high street , which includes henley ’s most famous attraction , henley ice cream , which is well worth a visit . alcester is a town rich in community spirit that comes together each year for events such as the alcester food festival . the town ’s roots stretch back to roman times , and its heritage is proudly preserved today in the roman alcester museum . just up the road from alcester is coughton court , home of the throckmorton family , who played a rather infamous role in the gunpowder plot of 1605 . as the new mp for the area , i assure the house that i will not continue that local tradition . my constituency also has some of the most beautiful waterways in the country . the rivers avon , alne , arrow and stour , and our fantastic canal network , including the longest canal aqueduct in england — the edstone aqueduct — are not only vital to our community ’s natural and industrial heritage , but are central to our environmental responsibilities . sadly , not enough has been done to tackle river pollution . i thank residents for joining citizens ’ science projects to regularly test the water and collect much - needed data on the state of our rivers ’ health , so that we can hold the government and water companies to account . as a rural constituency , we face many challenges : nhs dentistry deserts , long waiting times for mental health services , special educational needs and disabilities families battling for education provision , and fuel poverty . many of my vulnerable constituents live in off - grid homes that are expensive to heat . the warm homes and energy conservation act 2000 , introduced by sir david amess , was important legislation that sought to eliminate fuel poverty . to further combat it , we need an emergency home insulation programme so that homes are safe , warm and cheap to heat . as shakespeare wrote : “ some are born great , some achieve greatness , and others have greatness thrust upon ’em . ” i stand here today not because i was born great , or because i sought greatness , but because the people of stratford - on - avon have entrusted me with public service . together , we can achieve greatness not for ourselves , but for our constituents and our country . with a new parliament , we have a chance to strive for a fairer , greener and more inclusive future . the stage is set , and it is now time for us to play our part . it is a great pleasure to wind up the sir david amess adjournment debate for the opposition . all of us who served in the house with sir david remember him with enormous affection . we all remember his sense of humour and dedication to southend with enormous fondness . i particularly thank my right hon . friend we have had something like 25 speeches this afternoon . it will be difficult to touch on all of them in such a short time , but i will try to canter through some of the more memorable moments . my hon . friend we had another fine maiden speech from it was not exactly a maiden speech from my right hon . friend we had another maiden speech from indicated assent . well , there we are ; we have some cross - party links already . in her maiden speech , we had another maiden speech from in another maiden speech , the maiden speech from we had a maiden speech from we heard from my hon . friend in her maiden speech , we heard a maiden speech from my hon . friend we heard a very important speech from i am running out of time , so perhaps my opposite number on the government benches , this will be a good test of my ability to speak quickly as a welshman . it is fair to say that we have had a very robust and positive debate this afternoon , criss - crossing constituencies from the north of scotland all the way to the south coast of england . because i am indeed welsh , and because i pay tribute to all those members who have made maiden speeches — it is eight years since mine , which feels like a lifetime ago — and i will try to canter very quickly through what were truly wonderful maiden speeches from right across the house . i pay tribute to my hon . friend it must be said that i say to my hon . friend i had a number of meetings with my hon . friend i say to my hon . friend the reason for that canter is to enable me to pay tribute to the opening speech in this debate by to conclude , i thank you , madam deputy speaker , and the other deputy speakers . as a whip , it is a rare privilege to be able to speak , so i congratulate you on your election to the deputy speakership . i am reliably informed by the under - secretary of state for wales , my hon . friend i pay tribute to all the staff of this house — civil servants , all our staff , our constituency teams , and those in mr speaker ’s office — as we rise for the conference recess . i wish colleagues successful conferences — although , i think some might be a little more jubilant than others — and i look forward to seeing all members when we return in october . question put and agreed to . resolved , that this house has considered matters to be raised before the forthcoming adjournment . motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(martin mccluskey . ) thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to hold my first adjournment debate in this house . i sought this debate because i am conscious that the forthcoming budget is rapidly approaching and i wanted to raise with members and ministers the issue of the cliff edge for funding of the uk shared prosperity fund . any future funding of the ukspf is of course a matter for the chancellor , but i would like to use the debate today to discuss the merits of the fund , how we can learn from the experiences of implementing it over the past few years , particularly in local government , and the approach to local growth funds under the new labour government . we know that the government ’s top mission is to boost economic growth across the uk . it is my firm belief that a new , improved version of the ukspf could make an important contribution to that while also supporting local communities and boosting regeneration efforts . i thank the under - secretary of state for housing , communities and local government , my hon . friend the ukspf was introduced as the domestic replacement for the european structural and investment fund after brexit . the previous funding provided by the conservative government did not match the european structural and investment fund but did provide local authorities with some devolved funding to support local priorities , with particular emphasis on regeneration , business support and skills . the ukspf began in december 2022 and is due to end in march 2025 . although it is by no means perfect , i believe it has had a broadly positive impact and i would like to draw on my own experience as a former medway council cabinet member responsible for distributing the ukspf . feedback from whitehall to officials at the council has been that medway council ’s approach was considered best practice , and hence i am keen that the minister hears about our experience . i know he is a big supporter of local government and evidence - based policy making , and no doubt he will wish to hear from other members of this house who also have direct experience of the ukspf . in medway , we used our ukspf allocation to support local community groups , businesses and charities , which we considered best placed to recognise what their areas needed in order to thrive . rather than a top - down approach , we asked communities what they needed and functioned as the facilitator to make things happen , using the ukspf . the feedback we received was that this approach was empowering for local communities and brought people together . an spf network was established that created a mutually supportive community that led in later years to joint bids for community projects . the ukspf ’s potential to support broader regeneration efforts to revitalise our town centres is significant . in medway , small pots of money delivered significant economic and social benefits . one of the ways i was particularly keen to use the ukspf was to help our town centre forums host high street events , on the basis that this would bring in thousands of extra visitors and benefit local businesses . a notable example of this is the chatham chinese new year festival , held earlier this year in what is now my constituency . i was the biggest such celebration in the uk outside london and led to an approximate 25 % increase in footfall on chatham high street . the festival was free to attend and saw a parade , street food , a market , traditional dancers and martial arts masterclasses . the chatham town centre forum partnered with the local chinese association , the shopping centre , medway youth council , and local schools and charities to deliver the event . feedback from residents and vendors was unanimously supportive . materials purchased using the ukspf will enable the event to run for future years without further financial support from the council , so the ukspf will leave a lasting impact . this is important because we want schemes like the ukspf where possible to deliver longer - term benefits . i will briefly turn to a few other ways that we used the ukspf to support longer - term improvements in medway . we offered small feasibility funds — pots of as little as £ 5,000 — to help groups demonstrate that an idea would work . they could then use that proof of concept to go on to attract funding from other sources to make it happen . we helped community groups , such as the chatham intra cultural consortium , to transition into a charitable incorporated organisation , or cio . achieving that new structure means that it can bid for other sources of funding and is less reliant on financial support from the council . that means it can continue its incredibly important heritage work . helping groups to get on a more financially sustainable footing is particularly important in the context of years of constrained local government finance . we also used the ukspf to provide grants to help businesses to grow by purchasing modern technology and equipment . for instance , a gift business specialising in handmade travel keepsakes was able to use the grant to invest in a new fibre laser machine , which significantly enhanced the business ’s productivity and efficiency , allowing it to handle larger orders . we also funded net zero audits and green grants for local businesses that wanted to reduce their operating costs by making their premises more energy - efficient , and we helped them get those green certificates that are now needed to bid for many contracts . does my hon . friend agree how important the spf is to areas , including truro and falmouth in cornwall , that lost their funding under the european regional development fund and the european structural fund when we came out of the eu under brexit ? does she agree how fundamental it is that there is some sort of replacement fund for that ? i absolutely agree , and i will be making the case for that replacement fund later . i thank my hon . friend for her contribution . in my constituency , more than 30 local businesses have so far been supported under these ukspf - funded programmes to reduce their costs , to grow their business and to contribute to helping us reach net zero . we would not be able to do that without this replacement funding for the eu structural funds . i am conscious that in this final funding year the focus of ukspf spending is on people and skills . it will be important for ministers and others to assess the impact that these projects have on helping economically inactive people into good - quality training and work . the examples i have given are just a snapshot of how local councils across the uk have used the ukspf . overall , i consider that the ukspf has worked well in my constituency , and i understand that it has worked well in others too , which is great to hear . it has delivered the economic growth and regeneration aims that this new government are committed to boosting further . despite those successes , there have been challenges with the ukspf , and it is appropriate that we consider them now , as the existing funding cycle comes to a close . broader feedback from local authorities to the local government association has highlighted a number of issues . the first is short timescales from whitehall . local authorities were given just three months to develop ukspf investment plans in collaboration with local stakeholders . we need to give people more time to get the right approach and to put more emphasis on long - term strategic planning . the lga has proposed that any future version of the ukspf considered by the government should adopt a six to eight - year funding cycle , and i would certainly endorse that approach . we also need to reflect on the impact of single - year funding . the annual funding allocation of the ukspf often led to local authorities commissioning services for just 12 months in order to manage the financial risk . for some projects , that is perfectly appropriate , but for those local areas using the ukspf for business or skills support , for example , it made it more difficult to address some of the longer - term issues and inequalities in our communities . another issue is central government restrictions . the requirement that skills be addressed in year 3 was an unnecessary restriction . we should trust local authorities to collaborate with their local partners in order to address community needs without such restrictions . i also consider that there is scope to improve and streamline the ukspf reporting process , which some feedback has indicated was overly bureaucratic . it is of course important that the government receive assurance that funding has been spent appropriately and used effectively . a fine balance will need to be struck in future . finally , i am aware that there were some delays in getting money out the door to local authorities to fund agreed projects . it is important that that , too , is considered by the new minister for any future approach to local growth funding . i will return to the immediate challenge that we face : the expiration of funding to support the ukspf at the end of march 2025 . without continued funding of some sort , the types of initiatives that i have highlighted will struggle to continue or be replicated . i am not aware of any existing funding that would help fill the gap . for longer - term services such as business support and employability programmes that rely on establishing trust and employing staff , the cliff edge is of particular concern . providers are likely to see staff leave as contracts get closer to their end dates , putting at risk efforts to support businesses and help people get back into work and stay in good , stable employment . for those reasons , i join with the lga to urge the minister to work with the chancellor to include an additional one year of flexible revenue funding for the ukspf in the forthcoming budget . the lga has suggested that such funding should equate to the value of year 3 of the ukspf programme . i ask the minister to consider that as part of his discussions with the chancellor . doing so would remove the immediate cliff edge and give ministers time to consider what the new government ’s approach to local growth funds should be . as i have set out , i consider that longer term allocations are needed alongside a more flexible and lighter - touch national framework that supports even greater local decision making . that would also give time to assess the full outputs of the ukspf and what improvements can be made for a future replacement fund . i am pleased to say that the outcomes achieved by medway council already exceed those set out in the original ukspf investment plan submitted to whitehall some years ago . that data , alongside data from lots of other local authorities , should be available to ministers and could provide a valuable steer on what approaches proved successful and what did not work . i am really confident that by learning from the past and working in partnership with local government to deliver a more flexible , longer - term funding scheme , the new government could provide a real boost to local economies and communities that goes beyond far beyond anything that we have seen in the current ukspf funding cycle . it is a pleasure to respond on behalf of the government to the excellent speech of my hon . friend i congratulate my hon . friend on securing the debate and on the strength of the case she made . it is clear from what she has said just now and previously — i am similarly grateful for the question she asked me at oral questions last week — how strongly she feels about the uk shared prosperity fund as well as the work she did in medway and the impact she made with the fund . there is clearly an awful lot to learn from the medway example , and i look forward to doing that when we meet again shortly after the conference recess . i am grateful to the minister for giving way and to my hon . friend my hon . friend makes an important point . the united kingdom government are ambitious for growth across all of the united kingdom . ours is a four - nations commitment , and we look forward to working closely with colleagues in scotland , in all strands of local growth funding , to ensure that people across scotland — and in wales and northern ireland — get the benefits of growth and that dividend of which he speaks . on the particular point about the uk shared prosperity fund , i agree on its effectiveness and will talk about its future , as i know colleagues are keen for me to do . i too thank my hon . friend my hon . friend makes an important point about the health of local government . like many colleagues , i am a veteran of local government , and i am very conscious of the pressures it is under . as we design a new model for local growth , i am also conscious that local authorities will be at the heart of making it effective . if they do not have the capacity because of those pressures , that will be a limiting factor on our success , and i am very mindful of that . i have seen at first hand the good work that the ukspf has done in my constituency , and i appreciate why there is such interest in its future . it has helped to support organisations that are addressing unemployment and providing training , such as the bestwood partnership and evolve , which have made a huge difference to our community . it has also backed community projects such as the kimberley community garden , allowing its members to redevelop their site and continue important community outreach work . so i understand very strongly why there is such interest in the fund . as my hon . friend the member for rochester and strood said , future funding is a matter for the chancellor and the budget — of course , we have the ongoing spending review , and the budget on it is one of the beauties of the electoral cycle and of our democracy that a change election brings in colleagues with a lot of different experiences . my hon . friend talked about the impact that the £ 3.3 million from the ukspf has had in medway and about what she did to design the work involved , and i am keen to learn from that . it is good to hear how the funding has supported growth in high streets and towns , increasing footfall , supporting local businesses and regeneration in the town centres of chatham , rainham and gillingham , and addressing local challenges and , crucially , opportunities alongside community leaders . it has also supported projects such as emerge advocacy , which supports young people struggling with their mental health , and mutual aid road reps , which was formed during the covid pandemic to combat loneliness and isolation . those hugely significant projects reach people who are often the hardest to reach , and the ukspf has backed them . similarly , and very attractively , as my hon . friend said , the fund has made sure that there have been great events in medway , such as the chinese new year festival , easter celebrations , heritage awareness events and the intra lateral arts festival . there are lots of great things , and the model in medway shows that putting local people in charge and letting them set local priorities yields great results , including a significant increase in town centre footfall and a greater sense of community . when my hon . friend says medway is a model , there is a lot of evidence for that , and i look forward to hearing about it . my query is about the current version of the shared prosperity fund . some of the capital projects going on at the moment are time - limited to the end of march . some will not be finished by then , but local authorities are rushing to complete them and spending more money because they are worried that some of it — the current money , not the future money — could be clawed back . will the minister confirm that that will not be an issue with those existing projects and that that money will not be clawed back , so those projects can be completed ? i am grateful for that intervention . as my hon . friend knows , i have inherited 15 , 16 or 17 strands of local growth funding , all at different stages , with the decisions made , in many cases , many years ago . we are trying to make the most sense of them and get the best value out of them . with regard to the projects she mentions , i encourage my hon . friend to help her local projects to engage with my officials , so that they can give clarity on precisely what the timelines are in the context of what may well be discussed as part of the budget . i am very happy to work with her to make sure that that happens . turning to some of the challenges to the ukspf mentioned by my hon . friend the member for rochester and strood , we have to start with the future of the programme . local authorities , right hon . and hon . members , and organisations across the country that deliver projects have rightly been seeking clarity on what comes next . my mailbag is very full , and we are giving the matter full consideration . we recognise the hard work undertaken — it is important that that is stated from the dispatch box — and we recognise the challenges that time poses . organisations traditionally funded in annual cycles constantly have to put hard - working members of staff on 90 - day redundancy notices . that puts pressure on people who then perhaps seek other work , because it does not suit them and their life — and why would it ? we understand that those cliff edges are not a good thing . they are at the forefront of our minds as we think about the future . i , too , congratulate my hon . friend the member for rochester and strood on securing this debate and thank her for doing so . this is such an important moment . we heard from my hon . friend order . i remind members that interventions must be short . it also helps employability and , crucially , access to work . does the minister agree that such cross - uk funding is hugely important for areas like mine , where inequality is an issue ? i am very grateful for that intervention . i think i can probably speak for most colleagues when i say that the general election was , in many regards , quite a tricky one this time , but one of the few sources of joy was my right hon . friend , the deputy prime minister ’s battle bus , which seemed to reach admirable distances up and down the country , including to fife . i know , from having spoken to her , how much she enjoyed that visit . the model my hon . friend i want to address the challenges mentioned by my hon . friend the member for rochester and strood . she started with timescales . certainly , the tiny run - in in year one is not an example of good practice , and is something we would always seek to avoid . i do not think that the government of the day thought it was a good idea , but i think they rather found themselves a victim of circumstance . we absolutely hear that point . my hon . friend mentioned the local government association ’s desire for a six to eight - year funding window . again , i understand that very well . i have to say that that is quite challenging . governments generally budget on a three - year cycle and often decisions are made on a one - year cycle . we have talked about wanting to give more certainty and a longer time period . i can not commit to six to eight years , but i can commit to that principle . she mentioned the impact of single - year funding , and as i said , we very much understand that . on my hon . friend ’s point about central restrictions and monitoring , that is one of the points on which the new government intend to diverge from the old one . my view is that we need to give communities up and down the uk the tools and resources to use their expertise to improve their community within the framework set by the prime minister and his missions for the country . they are the experts in this case , not ministers . we want a lighter touch on monitoring , and we want to be less directive on what the funding is for . ukspf is actually a very good example of that , relative to other local growth funding , but i hear some of the challenges on that . they are important design challenges that i think we can engineer out as part of any future local growth funding programming . our model of local growth is reflected in the conversations we have had with local authorities and communities up and down the country . we know there is a desire to move to a more allocative settlement , with fewer beauty parades and a stronger focus on deprivation and need . we know there is a real desire for a lighter touch on monitoring , which can become a cottage industry in itself , and that is our view , too . growth is at the heart of the things that will shape our future and growth . with local growth funding , the clue will be in the name . we want to ensure that the projects chosen by local communities drive growth . of course , we must see the fiscal picture in the context of the inheritance left by the last government . this morning my hon . friend penned an article on a well - known labour - leaning blog , and what i took from that was the mutual desire of this government and local government to reset the relationship to make it a better partnership , and to drive better outcomes . that will , i think , lead us to a more positive place . if local authorities are in the room and fully engaged , they may be able to use their creativity to combine funds with other funding streams , so that the money can go further . the shared prosperity fund has been a good model , but we will make changes , particularly in relation to short - term timescales and reducing some of the burdens . i have mentioned the importance of resetting the relationship with local government . notwithstanding what we will be discussing on we , as a government , are committed to growth across the united kingdom . we were elected on a manifesto that stressed the need to adopt a partnership approach with local authorities and an intention to stabilise the funding system , and we are going to do that . we are working closely with local authorities , stakeholders , the scottish parliament , the senedd and the northern ireland executive and will continue to do so , to ensure that there is a smooth transition to a new funding regime . i look forward to visiting northern ireland on monday to talk further to colleagues who are interested in the ukspf . my hon . friends are rightly seeking certainty . i know that they want that as soon as possible , and we have at least a bit of a pathway towards it , because , as always , important announcements will be made in the budget statement and the ongoing spending review will shape the future . we hear the strong messages that my hon . friends have conveyed . it has been brilliant to hear about the excellent work done in medway and in other parts of the country , and i am keen to work with colleagues as we go forward to shape local growth funding . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . thank you , madam deputy speaker . may i thank hon . members who have made their first speeches today for setting the bar so high ? i hope i can live up to the standard that they have set . i am sent to this place by the constituents of lichfield , a constituency that includes not only the city itself , but the town of burntwood and around 40 villages and hamlets in the great county of staffordshire . i am proud to serve the area that has been my home since before i knew to call anywhere home and where i hope it will be for many , many more years to come . my predecessor in this house was sir michael fabricant . he was knighted in 2023 for political and public service after more than 30 years representing first the constituency of mid staffordshire and then lichfield in this house . thirty - two years in total sir michael served , and i think that would be a number to which we would all aspire . should i be fortunate enough to still be in this place in 30 years ’ time , madame deputy speaker , i can only hope to have such a head of hair . it is , however , to longevity that i wish to turn now . although i have received advice from some colleagues not to mention the domesday book , i can neatly sidestep that as the recorded history of my constituency dates back some 1,000 years before william the conqueror to the roman invasion and the establishment of letocetum , a roman fort and later settlement near the crossroads of watling street and rykneld street in my constituency . the crossing of those two roads remained an important place throughout the roman and saxon periods , and , in the 7th century , chad of mercia established a cathedral and diocese in lichfield , which still exists today . in just over a week ’s time , i will be proud to be in attendance at the installation of — i think — the 58th dean of lichfield cathedral . the right reverend jan macfarlane will be the first woman to hold that post and will not only smash a glass ceiling , but be an excellent advocate for the cathedral and the church in the local community and beyond . the 7th century is also noteworthy for the burying of the staffordshire hoard , which was uncovered in hammerwich in my constituency in 2009 , near that same crossroads of watling street and rykneld street . the largest collection of anglo - saxon gold ever found , the hoard is already having , and will continue to have , a significant impact on our understanding of the people of these isles , before there was an england , a scotland , a wales or a northern ireland . let me move on from the 7th century . over the coming years , the city would continue to flourish and establish itself as a religious and ecumenical centre , although much of the surrounding area maintained its rural and agrarian aspect for many centuries to come . in this time , the area did produce innumerable great lives , and , while they are far too numerous to mention all of them here , i should note gregory king , the world ’s first economic statistician ; elias ashmole , whose collections founded the ashmolean museum , the first of its type in the uk ; david garrick , the noted theatre innovator and manager ; the physician erasmus darwin , a founding member of the lunar society who had a rather famous grandson ; the poet , anna seward ; thomas gisborne of yoxall lodge , an abolitionist and a close associate of william wilberforce ; the painter john louis petit , who is having a wonderful renaissance in the understanding of his work ; frederick oakeley , who translated the words to “ o come all ye faithful ” in lichfield cathedral ; and , of course , samuel johnson , a man of letters and the author of the first dictionary of the english language . johnson ’s heir , samuel barber , was a freed slave who would go on to run a school in burntwood , decades before tom jenkins would begin teaching in teviothead in scotland , and who would also serve as a dozener in local government in lichfield and almost certainly become the first black man to serve in local government in the uk . before i move on from some famous people from around the area , i should mention a local success story in sophie capewell . lichfield ’s golden girl brought home not just a gold medal from paris this year , but a world record as part of team gbs fantastic efforts . in doing so , she ended my reign as the most successful former pupil of my old school , nether stowe in lichfield , and although i had hoped to hold that title a little longer than 32 days i am happy to be disappointed on that point . returning to my historical tour of lichfield and its surrounding area , we reach the early and mid-19th century , and the town of burntwood , a conurbation of mining villages , which grew up some four miles from lichfield and has a similarly proud history . its most notable resident was the fundraiser and campaigner stephen sutton , who raised millions for the teenage cancer trust despite his diagnosis . we lost him far too soon , at the age of just 19 . he was made an mbe for his fundraising , so it is more than fitting that burntwood town council remembers him through a student award named in his honour . not to be outshone by the cathedral down the road , burntwood also took its place in ecclesiastical history when , in 1883 , st anne ’s church in chasetown became the first in the country to have electric lighting . today , the people of burntwood still maintain a close - knit community , typical of former mining areas . that is shown by the great examples of the spark café and burntwood be a friend , which have done so much to step in to replace services cut during 14 long years of conservative government . if we are discussing burntwood , we can not forget the giant - killing exploits of chasetown fc in the fa cup of 2007 - 08 . at some point , i will forgive the members for cardiff . burntwood is not the only part of my constituency that has a mining history . the village of handsacre also more than played its part in powering the industry of the 19th and 20th centuries . it is also the village where my old man taught his first lessons as a probationary teacher in the 1970s . as for the suggestion that his geordie accent was in part responsible for his hiring in a school built to teach the children of new arrivals from the north - east , that remains suspected , if unconfirmed . mining was not the only industry that found its way to my part of staffordshire . many of us will recognise the name armitage shanks , but few will know its links to the village of armitage , just a short trip up rugeley road from handsacre . as the new government focus their legislative agenda on growth , i remind colleagues that while many of us may have already spent a penny with armitage shanks , they are all welcome to visit and spend many more in the coming years . all this industry meant that the canals came to my constituency . the coventry canal and the trent and mersey canal are still navigable today , and the work of the lichfield and hatherton canal restoration trust should be commended , as it aims to restore that link as a green and blue way over the coming years . having touched again on transport , i will complete the circle and return to the crossroads that made letocetum . watling street , or the a5 , as it is now known , and rykneld street , the a38 , are major transport arteries that link my constituency together , and link it easily to the rest of the country . the a38 in particular has helped to establish a logistics centre in the village of fradley on the site of the former raf lichfield . fans of the bbc ’s “ bargain hunt ” will know fradley well , given the regular appearances of richard winterton and his auctioneers on that show . i hope that i can get as much airtime as they do . slightly further up the a38 is the national memorial arboretum near alrewas — a wonderful venue , as the site of national remembrance . i advise every single person to make a visit there to remember , not just in november but on any day . i am sure that in the coming months the secretary of state for transport will grow tired of my lobbying about the need for a railway station to serve that amazing location . on a dissimilar note , the first travelodge in the uk was opened slightly up the road some 39 years ago , near the village of barton - under - needwood , although that village should be much better remembered as the home of the holland tug of war team . founded in 1970 , the team has represented england at numerous international tournaments , and even brought home a silver medal from the 2010 world open championships . it is to this constituency that i will return during the recess . i look forward to speaking to my constituents about transport , access to healthcare , education , health and care plans , and many other issues that are on their lips . i look forward to bringing those stories back to this place , so that i can continue to advocate on my constituents ’ behalf .