before we begin today ’s proceedings , i would like to make a short statement . on monday night , the house agreed a new policy based on a report of the house of commons commission setting out the steps that can be taken if a member is arrested on suspicion of committing a violent or sexual offence . this involves a risk assessment carried out by a panel , which may recommend that a member be excluded from the parliamentary estate . more details of the policy are available on the house of commons commission ’s webpage . as the house knows , the main motion , as amended , was agreed to without a division . no member voted against the exclusion policy . however , i understand that some hon . members have received threats on social media since the vote on monday . let me be quite clear : any attempt to intimidate or threaten any member of this house is totally and wholly unacceptable . it is an affront to our democracy and to the constituents who elected us , and it is a contempt of this house . any member who receives threatening communications should report them to the parliamentary security department and , if appropriate , to the police through the parliamentary liaison and investigations team , which will be able to investigate further . i wrote to all hon . members last night to remind them of the support services available to members . we take this very seriously . on a point of order , mr speaker . is it relevant to what i have just said ? it is , mr speaker . given that our legal system has in - built safeguards to protect the rights of the accused and that we in this place promote and defend these rights on behalf of our constituents , was it not absolutely in order for this house to debate the extent of these rights in relation to the exclusion of members of parliament from this chamber and the estate before they had either been convicted or discharged by the courts ? it is absolutely right that this house should have an opportunity to debate and vote on these matters , as it did on monday night . i will leave it at that . the secretary of state was asked — what steps he is taking to help improve the reliability of rail services for passengers . what steps he is taking to help improve the reliability of rail services for passengers . performance varies across the network and is dependent on both reliable infrastructure and strong operator performance . where we have both , as on greater anglia , passengers enjoy great performance , and i am clear that this is a standard for all operators to achieve , working with their network rail route counterparts . i regularly meet network rail and train operators to encourage greater collaboration on day - to - day performance , including convening a rail industry summit in march . with fares up and cancellations at a record high , rail passengers are crying out for change . in my patch , reddish south and denton stations are served by just one train a week . i would like a train service that meets our needs , but the minister seems to have put rail reform on the back burner . is that because he can not deliver , or he thinks labour will ? the hon . member is completely wrong . the pre - legislative scrutiny of the draft rail reform bill is being done right now by the transport committee . i think i am the final witness to appear before the committee next week , so that it can , i hope , report in july . contrast that with the passenger - in - chief approach of meddling with the railways and indeed of a resource - led timetable to fit the existing staff , and i think it is quite clear that it is the conservatives who want to improve the rail system . summer has arrived and tens of thousands of visitors will be heading to chester and north wales , and cross - border connectivity is essential . i remind the minister of his government ’s cast - iron commitment , made in october , to electrify the north wales main line . when will the north wales main line actually receive an allocation of real money so it can start work on the electrification of the line ? the hon . member is absolutely correct that the prime minister ’s network north commitment means over £ 36 billion of former hs2 money is being put into other projects , chiefly in the north and the midlands . the electrification of the north wales main line is one of those , and it is something i am determined we will deliver . we are taking steps in allocating project time and resource so that we can advance such projects , but bear in mind that the hs2 spend was for up to 2043 , so it will not all come at once . i call the chair of the transport committee . is it the case that train operating companies stand ready to invest significantly to improve passenger journeys , but a disincentive is the break clause in current contracts ? ahead of wider reforms that the transport committee is scrutinising at the moment , may i urge the minister to review those break clause arrangements and incentivise that investment now ? this is the folly of labour ’s nationalisation plan , because the best performing operator in terms of punctuality is greater anglia , and that one has the option that is coming up . the labour party , if it makes it into government , would take away the contract from the operator that has the best performance , showing that it is all about dogma and not about best common sense . i firmly believe that where operators can deliver more for passengers , and indeed for their workforce , by having more certainty , there is certainly a case to be made for looking at those contract terms and giving them longer . my hon . friend knows that after decades of closure , kenilworth station has been reopened by a conservative government and a conservative county council . however , the reliability , indeed the variety of services through that station , would be significantly improved by double tracking the line between leamington and coventry . i am grateful to the secretary of state for the time he has already given me on this issue , but will my hon . friend do all he can to bring about that improvement , which will benefit not just my constituents , but also provide connectivity options that the northern leg of high speed 2 no longer will ? my right hon . and learned friend has been a champion of that project , and as he mentioned he met the secretary of state to discuss it . hs2 is making provision for the project to occur should funding be available , and the new local transport fund makes funds available for those parts where hs2 would previously have been delivered . there is now a great opportunity for my right hon . and learned friend ’s transport authority to fund the project that he has championed for so long . i call the shadow minister . in the five years since the government first admitted that reform of our railways was needed , passenger services have gone from bad to worse , with a train now cancelled every 90 seconds — the worse statistics on record . with the transport secretary openly admitting that any reforms this side of an election are unlikely , does the minister understand why passengers have given up on this government doing anything to improve their rail experience ? i do not agree with that assertion . post privatisation — nationalisation would reverse this — passenger numbers have doubled , and £ 100 billion has been invested in the railways by this government since 2010 . we look at performance , which of course we want to get better , but in march for example , 70 % of trains were running to time , with 2.9 % of cancellations . the two biggest cancellation failures during march were one trespass and one suicide , and the trespass alone caused 286 cancellations . yes , there is more we need to do , but the opposition front - bench team would have a lot more credibility if they recognised performance indicators and what parts we need to deliver , rather than just chucking dogma about nationalisation , which is a tired , failed old policy . whether his department provides grants for the provision of training for d1 licences . although we do not provide direct funding for drivers to obtain d1 licences , the department makes available more than £ 3 million a year through the bus service operators grant to community transport operators in england , which are predominantly charities operating vehicles that require d1 licences . they receive £ 1.60 for every £ 1 claimed , reflecting the increased costs faced by the sector , and supporting them to continue delivering inclusive and accessible transport across the country . i thank the minister for that answer . in scotland , as across the rest of the uk , there has been a shortage of minibus drivers , with brexit and the legacy of covid fuelling a crippling shortage of bus drivers . passenger - carrying vehicle drivers can pursue careers in various fields , including public transport , tour and travel companies , school transportation and private charter services . what more can the government do to incentivise such training ? the hon . gentleman might not be aware of the recent consultation to reduce the age requirement for bus and hgv drivers from 21 to 18 , and i encourage him to speak to the department for work and pensions . we are working closely with the relevant ministers at dwp to have sector - based work academies and skills boot camps , to encourage greater participation by drivers . if he will fund exploratory rail studies on passenger numbers through the local transport fund . the local transport fund is a £ 4.7 billion fund that has been allocated to local authorities in the north and midlands to fund a wide range of transport measures . the funding empowers local leaders to invest in the transport policies that matter most to people in their area , and that could include rail studies . guidance will be published shortly to support local leaders in developing their plans , but it will rightly be a local decision . may i first congratulate my hon . friend on the award of £ 168 million to the east riding to improve transport , whether that is potholes , bus shelters or whatever else in beverley and holderness ? the minister is aware of my championing , alongside labour colleagues , liberal democrat colleagues and the councils across the whole area , of the reopening of the hull to york line through beverley . i am delighted to hear him confirm today that that funding can be used to explore and produce a refined demand model for that railway . will he confirm that ? my right hon . friend is indeed a great champion for this scheme , which we have discussed many times . i am pleased to confirm that the local transport fund could be used to develop the new rail link between york and hull via beverley . it is important to say that it will be for the local transport authority to decide , and i encourage him to continue to engage with it . our upcoming guidance will set out more detail about the scope of the ltf , and i am sure he will continue with his mission to deliver . what steps he is taking to improve transport connectivity for towns and cities in the north - west . before i answer my hon . friend ’s question , may i just welcome very strongly your statement at the beginning of business , mr speaker , standing up for the rights of members to debate things in this house and the importance of protecting their security ? that is welcome , and i am sure it will have been welcomed by all parts of the house . in answer to my hon . friend ’s question , network north will see a further £ 19.8 billion of investment in the north of england following the redirection of funding from the second phase of hs2 . liverpool city region is one of six areas to benefit from nearly £ 4 billion of uplift in the second round of the city region sustainable transport settlements . a further £ 1.48 billion is going to the non - mayoral local authorities to fund a wide range of projects . guidance on how that should be spent will be forthcoming shortly . my right hon . friend knows how important rail connectivity is to my constituents . it will be further enhanced by the reconnection of the burscough curves , a project that is also supported by our hon . friend as my hon . friend knows , i recently hosted a roundtable , bringing together him , his local authority , lancashire county council , local rail operators and other interested parties to discuss how to further develop the business case for the burscough curves . he will be aware that we have allocated that money to the local transport fund . lancashire county council will get £ 494 million over seven years , starting next year . i suggest he continues the conversation we have had to urge the council to look at developing that scheme . we will be publishing guidance encouraging it to do that , working with members of parliament in the very near future . you can think of coppull station . when will the secretary of state improve on the timetable at the time of gladstone ? i am not entirely certain — the rail minister , my hon . friend we welcome the £ 494 million in lancashire , as you will in chorley , mr speaker . we have also been having discussions about what we want to see with that funding , whether that is at the hare and hounds junction in clayton or just fixing potholes across the constituencies . one of the important things in hyndburn and haslingden is making sure that our train stations are accessible for everybody . we currently have a few bids in , including church & oswaldtwistle and rishton . will the secretary of state look favourably upon those bids ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for welcoming the money that will go to her local authority . we will make it clear in the guidance , which i hope will be welcome to you as well , mr speaker , that local authorities should very much involve their members of parliament in discussing those priorities . i hope that every member in the north and the midlands where local authorises are getting those funds will take advantage of that . on my hon . friend ’s specific point about accessibility and our access for all programme , as she knows , a number of bids were made and they are currently being scrutinised . i hope that , in the near future , we will be able to set out which ones will be funded . i urge her to wait for that announcement . i wish her good luck . obviously , i can not prejudge that process , but i hope that she is successful . will the secretary of state explain why train fares have risen almost twice as fast as wages since 2010 ? the hon . lady will know that over the last two years the government have made significant interventions to keep rail fares rising no faster than the rise in people ’s wages . she also knows that we have to balance the farebox against the taxpayer . she will know that , because of the pandemic , the taxpayer has put in £ 31 billion over a couple of years to protect the rail industry . passenger figures have not yet recovered to their numbers beforehand . that is why it is important that , as soon as we can , we get rail companies on contracts that incentivise them to drive up the number of passengers using the service , which is how we will reduce the call on the taxpayer and enable fares to be kept competitive . what recent progress he has made on the east west rail project . for connection stage one of east west rail . i was pleased to attend an event in march to mark the completion of work on the final section of track connecting bicester and bletchley , with services expected to commence next year . at the spring budget , £ 240 million was announced to accelerate work introducing services between oxford and bedford by the end of the decade . following the announcement of the preferred route alignment between bedford and cambridge last may , a statutory consultation is due to launch this summer . the connection of east west rail from bedford to cambridge will cost the taxpayer an enormous amount of money — the minister knows that , because he was at the transport committee sitting right next to the permanent secretary when she said so — although apparently that is okay because a few landowners and developers will make shedloads of money out of planning gain . meanwhile , the latest chief executive officer of east west rail has scarpered because he could not stand the heat in the kitchen . as the minister said , east west rail is progressing with a statutory consultation — having completely fluffed the first consultation by not contacting the right people — but holding it over the summer months while people are away . all the time , the project is being driven by the economic growth board in the treasury , which meets secretly and tells people nothing . what can the minister tell my constituents about this project ? i thank my hon . friend for his question — [ laughter . ] he was indeed in the same room as i was when i was with colleagues — this is an important aspect — from the treasury and the department for levelling up as well as our permanent secretary to discuss the cross - governmental co - ordination that will be required to unlock all the economic benefits . as he knows — we will not necessarily agree on this point — i believe that east west rail is critical in delivering a workforce to cambridge , which will allow cambridge to compete with the likes of boston and cities in south - east asia so that those pioneers have a workforce and we can keep cambridge , and indeed oxford , motoring on that basis . on that basis , let us go to cambridge . thank you , mr speaker . indeed , some are more positive about the improved connectivity potential in and around cambridge , but the minister will be aware that his colleagues in the department for levelling up , housing and communities recently established the cambridge delivery group , which is looking to create 150,000 additional homes , which will in turn create a whole series of transport challenges . will he tell the house what structures are in place to ensure proper dialogue between his department , dluhc and east west rail ? the east west rail growth board , which , as my hon . friend what steps he is taking to support bus manufacturing . the uk boasts a strong and highly competitive bus manufacturing industry . manufacturers have benefited significantly from government funding as we work with industry to decarbonise the bus fleet . more than 5,200 buses have been funded across the uk since february 2020 , with uk bus manufacturers supporting many of them . uk manufacturers have grown substantially in recent years as a result of their success in securing orders , supported by £ 460 million of dedicated zebra — zero - emission bus regional areas — funding . the reality is that the uk government could do much more . at tuesday ’s sitting of the transport committee , mick whelan of aslef said that in germany , they have german trains and in italy , they have italian trains . he said : “ before they award a government contract , they look at their supply chains , future apprenticeships and all the things associated with those contracts ” . why does the uk continue to destroy its own industrial base by refusing to implement similar procurement policies for all transport manufacturers , including buses ? there is too big a reliance on chinese imports . as i said , uk bus manufacturers have done very well out of decarbonisation policies . they are every competitive , and i have had the opportunity in this job to visit a number of them . if the hon . gentleman believes that there is unfair competition from imports , he knows that there is an independent statutory body , the trade remedies authority , whose responsibility it is to look at importers where there might be dumping . if he thinks there is any evidence of that by any manufacturers , he should provide that evidence to the trade remedies authority so that it can conduct an investigation , as appropriate . i call the shadow minister . the uk has a proud bus manufacturing history , from london ’s iconic original routemasters to alexander dennis ’ next generation of hydrogen double - deckers used today in the liverpool city region . as operators and local authorities decarbonise their fleets , uk manufacturers are ready to power that green revolution , but our bus makers are at risk from cheap models imported from overseas . this week , a major uk operator is preparing to procure chinese - built buses for tens of millions of pounds due to cost pressures and because this government have not set out a full industrial strategy since 2017 . will the secretary of state tell the house what he will do to back british bus manufacturers and secure their role in this green revolution ? the hon . gentleman will know that it is not possible , given our international commitments under the world trade organisation , to specify that people have to buy british buses . he will also know that british bus manufacturers are very competitive . the government have made support available to businesses through our advanced propulsion centre and uk export finance . as i said to we back british buses . we have fantastic manufacturers , and i have confidence in them . in a fair competition , our bus manufacturers can take on the world . wrightbus has had £ 76 million of support from uk export finance to support its ambitious exports . it is a shame that he does not have the same faith in british industry that we do . i call the scottish national party spokesperson . deary me , mr speaker . we have confidence in the bus manufacturers , and it is a pity that the government do not — that is the problem . unlike sulebs and scotzeb — the scottish ultra - low emission bus scheme and the scottish zero - emission bus challenge fund — the zebra scheme has been a failure . no spin from the dispatch box can deny that , and our bus manufacturers are paying the price . we must learn from this , and we can start by encouraging those purchasing zero - emission buses to place greater emphasis on social value and wider environmental and economic impacts when evaluating tenders . the government must take responsibility . will the secretary of state consider conducting a cross - government review into prioritising domestic manufacturing within existing legal frameworks ? people are able to put social value into their tenders . my understanding is that local authorities do that , but they are not allowed to have a specific commitment to buy from a certain provision . the hon . gentleman has to decide whether he has confidence in our fantastic companies , as he set out . in a fair competition , some of the companies that have been mentioned — some of which i have visited — can win against competitors around the world . if he thinks that there is unfair competition and that companies are being subsidised , he should give the evidence to the trade remedies authority , which has the legal structures and the tools to do the job . we ’ve had one question about buses , and then a second one comes along . what steps he is taking to support local bus services . the government have provided over £ 4.5 billion to support and improve bus services since march 2020 . leicestershire county council received over £ 3.5 million in emergency recovery funding to help maintain services during and after covid , and has recently been awarded up to £ 7.6 million to deliver its bus service improvement plan . as the house will know , the word democracy comes from the greek “ demos ” , meaning the people , and “ kratos ” , meaning power — power to the people . well , the 1,200 people in north west leicestershire who signed a petition for the reinstatement of the numbers 16 , 29 and 29a bus services on their original routes are not feeling very empowered . despite a very well run campaign , there is no movement from arriva or leicestershire county council . what can the minister do to help my constituents ? where commercial operators want to change a service , as i understand happened in this community , they have to work with the local authority to replace services where possible and limit disruption . i would point out to the hon . gentleman that leicestershire county council has also received over £ 1 million from the rural mobility fund to trial demand - responsive services , and i encourage him to meet it . my constituents and i are extremely concerned about arriva ’s sudden proposals to close its depot in aylesbury , with no warning that it was even being considered . the company admitted that it would mean ending the vast majority of its services in our area , causing huge problems for those who rely on its buses to get to school , work and hospital . i have demanded an urgent meeting with its senior management , but what can the department do to help hold arriva to account and ensure aylesbury residents have the bus services they need and deserve ? i am aware of this problem , which has recently come to light . i would certainly encourage a meeting between the local authority , the bus company and my hon . friend , and i will assist him in any way in that respect . i am aware that some local operators , in the form of carousel buses and the oxford bus company , are running some of the services , but i accept that there is an issue in aylesbury and i will help him on an ongoing basis . if he will have discussions with ( a ) airbus and ( b ) boeing on air safety . both i and departmental officials engage proactively with industry , including boeing , airbus and other manufacturers , on aviation safety . the civil aviation authority , the independent safety regulator for the aviation sector , also engages regularly across the industry . i should point out that we have some of the safest skies in the world . the fatal accident rate of uk airlines is among the lowest in europe and the world . we have not had a single fatal accident involving commercial passenger airplanes for more than 29 years . i am determined that that safety record will continue . the minister might know that i am the chair of a manufacturing group for members of parliament . airbus , rolls - royce and boeing are amazing manufacturers at the heart of our manufacturing economy , but does he agree that we must sort out the problems that seem to have occurred in the manufacture of boeing ’s 737 max ? does he agree that the faster our regulators work with american regulators to sort this out , the better for british jobs and british innovation ? i absolutely agree with the hon . member that they are amazing companies with huge operations in the uk and enviable safety records . not one of the 171 boeing 737 max 9s operating globally operates in the uk or from the uk , so there was no need to ground them . the department for transport liaises closely with american authorities . the caa follows very closely the work of the us federal aviation administration to ensure that safety standards remain as high as possible . what recent discussions he has had with helicopter search and rescue operators on the adequacy of response times . the right hon . member will be aware that the maritime and coastguard agency is conducting an analysis of recent incident data to examine whether the demand for the search and rescue helicopter service has changed since the launch of the uk ’s second generation search and rescue aviation procurement . it is expected to be published by the end of 2024 . i have had no recent discussions on this point , as the review is ongoing . i thank the minister for his answer — he seems to be aware of the situation — but a new threat to search and rescue response times is emerging , namely the poor and deteriorating industrial relations between bristow ’s management and its staff . as we speak , members of the british airline pilots ’ association who work in sar cohort 2 are on strike , having been driven to it by a management who are playing negotiating hardball on salary and on terms and conditions . will the minister call in the management and make it clear to them that , as the customer , the government expect them to treat their search and rescue staff with the respect and consideration that their skill and bravery deserve ? i know how important search and rescue services are in the right hon . gentleman ’s constituency , and he has been a great champion for them . good industrial relations are clearly vital to ensuring that they operate effectively , and i am sure that the mca will keep that in mind during its review . i should add that just this morning , i agreed to meet the management of bristow . what funding his department is providing for road resurfacing . what funding his department is providing for road resurfacing . the government are firmly on the side of drivers , which is why we are using funding reallocated from the hs2 programme to improve the condition of the country ’s local highways network . our record funding increase of £ 8.3 billion for local highways maintenance in england over the next decade will enable highways authorities to resurface roads and fix thousands of potholes across the country . the secretary of state and his ministers are well aware of my campaign for the removal of the concrete surface of the a180 . it is now six years since i received a letter from the then roads minister telling me that the work would be completed by the end of 2021 . can the secretary of state tell me when work will begin to remove that concrete surface and make the road much safer than it is at present ? can he give me a firm date ? my understanding is that the a180 is part of the national highways concrete roads programme and that there is a plan to undertake additional treatment to reduce noise substantially early in the next road investment period , which starts next year . my hon . friend may wish to meet the roads minister to discuss the matter in more detail and secure some specific information about the timing . as my right hon . friend knows , shropshire ’s road network is the fifth longest in all the english local authority areas . last autumn , he made a welcome announcement about a significant increase in funding—£150 million — to repair and improve roads , and he made another in february about the hs2 reallocation of £ 136 million . will he explain to me , and to other shropshire members , what that will mean in practical terms for the amount to be spent on roads during the next parliament ? my right hon . friend is correct : shropshire county council will receive two pots of money , a minimum uplift of £ 153 million from 2023 to 2034 for highway maintenance and a further £ 136 million under the new local transport fund , starting next year and continuing for seven years . those figures represent a significant increase on what the council would otherwise have received . we will provide more detail shortly about the guidance on how the money should be used and , as i have said in response to earlier questions , members of parliament will be involved in setting those priorities . somerset is unfortunately home to tens of thousands of potholes . persistent flooding makes the problem worse , but so does the lack of attention given to improving the resilience of our roads . does the secretary of state recognise the importance of future - proofing them , with specific funds for local authorities to spend on measures of that kind , as opposed to pothole funding that serves only as a temporary sticking plaster ? i am pleased that the hon . lady has asked that question , because i absolutely do . part of our purpose in not only giving local authorities that significant funding increase but spreading it over 10 years , so that they have certainty over a longer period , is to enable them to move away from dealing with pothole filling and to embark on a proper road resurfacing programme . that funding will pay for the resurfacing of more than 5,000 miles of roads , thus delivering to the hon . lady ’s constituents the improvement that we all want to see . residents in west fenham recently said to me that car mechanics must be the main beneficiaries of conservative transport policy , given the steady flow of work for them caused by the terrible state of the roads . a local authority survey says that the roads are in their worst condition for 28 years , and aa call - outs are at a five - year high . how can the secretary of state possibly say that he is on the side of drivers when the roads are in such a terrible condition ? the hon . lady has just demonstrated why our decision to allocate a very significant and unprecedented increase in spending to improving local highway maintenance is exactly the right thing to do . i have noticed that my local authority is busy resurfacing roads across my constituency and the rest of gloucestershire . the money we are providing will enable every local authority to do that over the coming decade . i call the shadow minister . at the last transport questions , the secretary of state suggested that drivers know what they are getting with a conservative government . well , drivers know one thing they are getting from this government : more potholes — a hundred times as many as there are craters on the moon . in 2023 , rac patrols attended 33 % more breakdowns related to poor road maintenance than in 2022 , and aa call - outs were at a five - year high . the road repairs backlog has gone up to an eye - watering £ 16.3 billion , which is far greater than his allocation of money from scrapping the northern leg of hs2 . is it not abundantly clear to drivers , and to everyone else , that it will take the election of a labour government to fix britain ’s roads , just as it will take the election of a labour government to fix britain ? i am delighted that the hon . gentleman has asked that question , because we have set out our plan very carefully . there is £ 8.3 billion of extra money to improve the quality of local roads . the labour party has not backed that plan and has not committed a single penny of money to local roads , so the choice is clear : if people vote conservative , they get £ 8.3 billion spent on roads ; if they vote labour , they get none . what recent discussions he has had with network rail on the timeline for introducing bi - mode trains on the midland main line . a monthly meeting is held with network rail and east midlands railway to discuss the introduction of the new bi - mode trains . those meetings include notification of the latest delivery timescales that hitachi has provided to the operator , and an update on mobilisation plans and related infrastructure upgrades . the aim is for the new trains to be phased into passenger service throughout 2025 . i welcome the phased introduction of the bi - mode class 810 aurora trains on the midland main line through kettering next year . can my hon . friend the rail minister confirm that the new trains will be faster , quieter and more environmentally friendly than the current inter - city fleet , and that they will have more seats and luggage space , and better mobile phone signal reception ? i can confirm to my hon . friend that these fantastic new trains will be not only faster but quieter and more environmentally friendly , as they will be able to take advantage of the increasing extent of electrification that we are delivering on the midland main line . they will have 19 % more seats per five - car train , and they are designed for greater comfort and more luggage space . bearing in mind that my hon . friend is one of the hardest - working mps for his constituents , he and they will be delighted that there will be enhanced wi - fi and mobile phone reception , making his productivity even greater . what recent discussions he has had with transport for london on the refurbishment of gallows corner flyover . i am pleased to say that the gallows corner scheme was recently approved at outline business case stage , with over £ 50 million - worth of backing from the department for transport . my officials are liaising with transport for london to progress the scheme to the next stage of the process , and i look forward to tfl submitting the final business case for approval . i thank the minister for his announcement of the funding for a makeover of gallows corner flyover , but i fear that we must do better . this is a major junction connecting the eastern side of greater london with essex , and it is where the a12 and the a127 join together . my constituents in romford , and those of the wider essex region , will be disappointed that we are not getting a fundamental restructuring of the junction to address the safety and congestion issues that i have highlighted for decades . will he speak to transport for london , go back to the drawing board , and come back with something better and more permanent that will put the safety of road users first ? i will certainly go away and write to my hon . friend on his specific point , but i reassure him that we are spending over £ 50 million to improve that particular junction . if my hon . friend has concerns about the scope of the works , i urge him to take them up with tfl , because it is for tfl to develop the full business case . it is then submitted to the department for approval , which we hope will happen later this year . what steps he is taking with cabinet colleagues to prevent the use of fire and rehire practices in the transport industry . the government recently published a statutory code of practice on dismissal and re - engagement . the code will address the practice of fire and rehire , aiming to ensure that it is only ever used as a last resort , and that employees are properly consulted and treated fairly . the tuc has found that since 2020 about 10 % of all workers have had to reapply for their job . and let us remember that in 2020 british airways tried to sack 36,000 staff through fire and rehire , which was stopped only through strike action — the government took no action . in 2021 , go north west in manchester threatened the same and , again , industrial action stopped it happening — the government took no action . in 2022 , infamously , p&o ferries unlawfully sacked 786 staff before replacing them with agency staff — the government took no action . i implore the government to outlaw this practice . rather than just bringing in a code of best practice , they should be taking action to protect british workers . after the p&o incident , in which workers were indeed treated totally unacceptably , we introduced a whole range of measures set out in our nine - point charter , including the seafarers wages act 2023 , which will come into force this summer . we launched the seafarers charter , to which p&o has now committed , which i very much welcome . the code of practice on dismissal and re - engagement , which will come in before the summer recess , will give workers up to 25 % extra compensation if their employers do not abide by it . i call the shadow minister . the uk minimum wage is £ 11.44 an hour , but last week , here in parliament , peter hebblethwaite , the chief executive officer of p&o , admitted that it paid seafarers £ 4.87 an hour . this has been an awful breach of trust . what more will the minister do to stop companies acting like modern - day pirates of the high seas when it comes to fire and rehire ? as i mentioned in my previous answer , many of p&o ’s practices have indeed been totally unacceptable , including on minimum wage issues . that is why we introduced the seafarers wages act , which will ensure that seafarers operating on regular services in uk waters get the minimum wage . we have also co - ordinated with legislation in france to ensure a minimum wage corridor for all services operating between the uk and france , which will give workers the wages they deserve . i call the snp spokesperson . it is two years since the reprehensible actions of p&o , and peter hebblethwaite ’s calamitous appearance in parliament comes four years after willie walsh and álex cruz , the then ceos of the international airlines group and ba , shamefully threatened thousands of british airways workers with fire and rehire , having refused government covid assistance . on tuesday i asked the minister of state at the department for business and trade , in addition to my earlier answer , i should point out that the p&o case is being investigated by the insolvency service , and i await the outcome of that investigation . the point of the code of practice is to ensure that fire and rehire is very much a last resort . if employers breach the code , their employees can get up to 25 % greater compensation . the government have made sure that is the case . if he will make a statement on his departmental responsibilities . since the last transport questions , my department has been getting on with our plans : £ 143 million for new zero - emission buses ; a world - leading sustainable aviation fuel mandate ; cutting red tape for small - scale fishing businesses ; taking steps to future - proof the £ 18 billion classic car industry , which supports tens of thousands of skilled jobs ; and ensuring that taxpayers can hold local councils to account for how they spend their record funding boost for road resurfacing , made possible by reallocating high speed 2 funding . all labour has been able to offer is an unfunded , incoherent rail nationalisation plan , putting the unions in charge , cutting services for passengers and containing anti - car targets , taking us back to square one . given that tewkesbury is one of the fastest growing areas of the country , does the secretary of state agree that we need to expand the a46 and junction 9 of the m5 , and not reduce its capacity or downgrade it in any way ? if any agency puts plans to him to downgrade the a46 or junction 9 , will he reject those plans ? i am grateful to my hon . friend — and gloucestershire neighbour — for raising that issue . he rightly sets out that his constituency is one of the fastest growing . he is a doughty champion for his constituents and i am sure that any agency thinking of downgrading any of his road network would not dare to do so , for fear of the consequences of having to deal with him on the warpath . i call the shadow secretary of state . car insurance costs have increased by 80 % since the secretary of state came into office . if he is intent on ending the war on motorists , what has he done about it ? i am grateful to the hon . lady for advance notice of the question — she wrote to me this morning . i will say a few things . first , she will know that the insurance industry is the responsibility of the treasury , but it is an important issue for drivers , so i am happy to deal with it . i read her letter with great care , and i notice that it contains no plan and not a single proposal to deal with the cost of insurance . whereas this week the under - secretary of state for transport , my hon . friend secondly , having read the letter carefully , i notice that the hon . lady takes a pop at postcode pricing , which is about pricing according to risk . it seems to me that she is proposing — i am sure she can not really mean this — to put up insurance costs across the country to reflect the mayor of london ’s failure to grip crime in inner london . remember that we are now in topical questions , folks . given that the secretary of state had advance notice of my question , i am afraid that his answer shows how out of touch with reality he has become . car insurance is not a luxury but a legal requirement , and it is completely unaffordable for millions of drivers . there has been a £ 219 increase in the average premium in two years . instead of parroting conspiracy theories about 15 - minute cities , why does he not do his job , take action , demand action from regulators , call in the competition and markets authority , and act on soaring insurance premiums ? i will say a couple of things . first , the hon . lady called for action . my hon . friend the roads minister has already been meeting the industry and treasury ministers , who are responsible for the industry regulator , so we are already doing that . as i said , this is an issue not just in the uk but elsewhere . secondly , as i said , the hon . lady said in her letter that she was looking at outlawing the ability for insurers to price according to risk in local areas . i am sure that hon . members noticed that she has not denied that , so they will know that she is proposing for people across the country to face higher costs to reflect the higher crime that we see in inner london , where her labour mayor has failed to get a grip . will the rail minister join me in campaigning to save brandon station , which is a beautiful listed building that has been out of use for years ? greater anglia , to its credit , is trying to find a solution to ensure that that beautiful building can be put back into use . will he join me in that campaign and , if his diary allows , join me on 14 june , when we have a public meeting to drive that forward ? i will do everything i can . it is a beautiful example of railway architecture and it must be saved , so i applaud my right hon . friend ’s work . i recently had a conference for leaders in rail , at which i talked to all the train operators and network rail about bringing these beautiful buildings back to life for the community . i have met that team as well and will do everything i can to help him . it is now exactly four months since the avanti management were caught laughing at the government — they are not on their own . they were laughing because they see the performance payments that the government hand out to them as free money and a joke . when will the secretary of state take the smile off the faces of the appalling avanti management by finishing their contract ? when that incident occurred , the secretary of state and i made it clear to the teams at avanti and firstgroup that that was not acceptable , and their senior management agreed . it was crass and it was wrong . we often talk about avanti ’s performance . the overtime agreement had been withdrawn by aslef , which caused the start of the difficulties , but it has since been put back in place . when i looked at the data for the first week of may , there were pretty much 0 % cancellations from avanti induced incidents . matters are getting better and , where they are better , we should applaud the staff . the condition of local roads is the no . 1 concern raised with me by aylesbury residents , whether that is potholes , congestion caused by countless utility works , or simply not enough roads to cope with all the new houses that have been built . will my hon . friend reassure local residents that it is under this conservative government and our excellent local conservative council that aylesbury ’s roads will improve for my long - suffering constituents ? i recently met the council leader , martin tett , who is doing a fantastic job , aided by record investment by this government of £ 8.3 billion for road resurfacing and our street works consultation , which will crack down on utility organisations and ensure that they work much faster and much better . we are also giving extra funding on an ongoing basis . every day that hammersmith bridge remains closed is a reminder that this government can not be trusted to fix even the most basic problems . do the conservative government have any intention of keeping the promise they made in 2019 and fixing hammersmith bridge ? the bridge is owned by the london borough of hammersmith and fulham , which is not a conservative borough , so i will correct the record there . there are two phases of work : stabilisation to ensure permanent access for pedestrians , cyclists and river traffic — despite not being the owner , the government have put money into that — and strengthening . we will do everything we can to work with the owners of the bridge to make that happen . junction 10a on the a14 is a crucial piece of future roads infrastructure to support kettering ’s housing expansion . should north northamptonshire council approve the relevant planning application this coming monday , will my hon . friend the roads minister reconfirm his commitment to give the proper direction this project needs to proceed at pace , to visit the site with me and to arrange for me to meet with national highways to ensure progress ? yes , yes and yes . blackpool is experiencing the scourge of unlicensed taxis in our treasured seaside resort . uber and similar companies , which have no operating licence in blackpool , are allowing passengers to use their unlicensed taxis uninsured , creating a real public safety risk . these unlicensed taxis are parking in local ranks illegally , taking fares from our hard - working , rule - abiding blackpool taxi drivers . what is the minister doing to tackle these unlicensed drivers , and will he meet me to discuss this issue in my constituency ? may i first welcome the hon . gentleman to his place ? he is a worthy winner and i am delighted to see him in the house . i wish him good fortune . the government have published updated taxi and private hire vehicle best practice guidance for licensing authorities in england . i will write to the hon . gentleman in detail and set out the particular points , and then we will see whether a meeting is required thereafter . in horsham we have a significant problem with car racing on specific stretches of road . does my right hon . friend agree that there is a role for speed cameras in deterring those activities and the real risks they represent ? i am grateful to my right hon . friend for raising the important matter of road safety . he is right that there is a role for speed cameras . decisions for enforcing speed limits are for the police and local agencies . i know he has raised the issue with them . i hope our exchange today will continue to put pressure on them , that the campaign he is running to ensure safer roads for his constituents is successful , and that the police take note . i call andrew bridgen — not here . i was pleased to have been told late last year that haughley and ely north junctions would be funded , but i have since become frustrated by the slow progress . i hear all the right noises from the department , but when i talk to greater anglia and network rail , all i hear is frustration at the slow progress . will the secretary of state promise me that we will get on with these projects , which are crucial to ipswich , suffolk and east anglia in general ? i can give that assurance to my hon . friend . i think his labour opponent stated that the conservatives had not promised to deliver this project . in october , the prime minister set out that we would deliver the rail junction at ely and haughley . it is a project that the department is keen on , as it is good for freight , and for our freight growth target . i will meet my hon . friend and his colleagues who support the project to show them the steps that we are taking to get this vital project under way . the secretary of state will be aware that the courts yesterday awarded £ 25 million of compensation to 1.4 million passengers who were overcharged for rail fares between 2015 and 2017 by stagecoach south western trains , the predecessor franchise to south western railway . will he ensure that affected passengers are not left out of pocket , and get automatic redress , rather than having to make an historical claim ? i have been meeting the operators to discuss the matter . i am happy to write to her , setting out the exact conclusion of those conversations . i am always keen to ensure that passenger and consumer interests are protected and preserved , so i will write to her . i thank the secretary of state and the rail minister for their support for upgrades to pokesdown station in my constituency , not least the improvements to the lifts , but the project has run into a few technical and financial problems ; will the secretary of state or the minister update the house on it ? i promised my right hon . friend from this dispatch box that the project would be delivered , and i continue to give him that assurance . i am sorry that there have been those delays . this week , i spoke to the team at some length about the station . my right hon . friend knows that i will visit him at the station , and i will have some more concrete news for him then . how reliable are the key performance indicators that the train operators are quoting , which the rail minister mentioned earlier ? the disability news service reports that train companies are sending unreliable statistics from freelance mystery shoppers who pretend to be disabled and give overly positive feedback about the experience of disabled passengers . does he share my concern about that , and what can he do about it ? data from mystery shoppers , as the hon . gentleman calls them , can not be used unless those individuals have the disabilities that they claim to , but there are wider mystery shopping experiences that are undertaken . i will happily write to him — in fact , i will meet him , seeing as he is such a great man — and take him through the steps that are taken into account . i also thank him very much for doing what he always does , which is raising that matter with me last night , so that we could discuss it in advance . the reopening of aldridge train station will finally give my constituents the railway service that they badly need and deserve . i wish to place on record my thanks to the minister ’s department , the government , former mayor andy street and the west midlands combined authority for their support in securing funding for the project through the city region sustainable transport settlement . will my hon . friend help me to continue to nudge network rail and others to progress this to completion in 2027 ? yes . it is a brilliant £ 30 million project , with 40 car parking spaces , which my right hon . friend has been instrumental in making happen . i will , i hope , meet the new mayor , whom i congratulate , to ensure that he delivers the project for 2027 , as the fantastic andy street promised . more people are killed by cows and lightning than by dangerous cyclists , whereas around five people a day are killed on our roads by motor vehicles — a level that has flatlined under this government . when will the transport secretary publish the long - overdue strategic framework for road safety ? the secretary of state took a decision on road safety yesterday , so clearly we are addressing all these matters on an ongoing basis . i addressed the issue in a westminster hall debate recently , but i will write to the hon . member with more detail . the labour mayor of south yorkshire has been given colossal sums of money by this government . sadly , it appears that he chooses to spend it on sheffield supertrams and sheffield ’s transport infrastructure , not doncaster ’s . will the minister send a clear message to him that he should spend this money not only wisely , but across the combined authority , not just in sheffield ? it is obviously up to mayors to decide how to spend the money , but i would expect them to spend it fairly across the entire region that they represent . given that fantastic members of parliament such as my hon . friend will hold them to account , voters in his constituency and across the combined authority area will hopefully make the right decision , when they get the chance . new evidence shows that ofgem ’s targeted charging review has led to significant increases in public electric vehicle charger standing charge rates , which are passed on to the consumer . in one site in northern scotland , costs have increased from £ 315 to £ 809 per day . what will the minister do to regulate the cost of electric vehicle charging nationally ? i am the minister responsible for electrical vehicles . the cost of charging is a concern to many ev drivers . on standing charges for charge point operators , i met with the chief executive of ofgem , the regulator , earlier this week to discuss that exact issue . it is one of the things that ofgem is looking at . how is the minister working to improve the supply of rolling stock orders , to give customers a better experience , and importantly , to give companies such as hitachi orders to bid for ? as an example , just yesterday an invitation to negotiate was sent out by southeastern to five train manufacturers , one of which is hitachi , which is so well supported and championed by my hon . friend . we have plans over the coming years for 2,000 rolling stock orders , worth a total of £ 3.6 billion . i hope that , with our support , the benefits for train manufacturing supply chains will continue . road safety organisations and driving instructors are concerned to ensure that young drivers have some experience of night driving . does the minister intend to ensure that night driving becomes part of the test ? the hon . gentleman knows that the test has got more difficult and onerous for individuals ; we have made it much harder to pass in the first place . we look at all aspects of post - test passing on an ongoing basis , but i will take the matter up with him personally . i was grateful to the roads minister for his commitment in an earlier answer to working with us in buckinghamshire to find a solution to the crisis created by arriva withdrawing bus services , but does he agree that companies that have been all too happy to take a taxpayer subsidy have a moral duty to maintain those services or give the money back ? we certainly expect those companies to engage with the local authority to ensure the provision of alternative service . that is what we intend to ensure happens . the government recently announced yet another consultation support mechanism for the production of sustainable aviation fuel . meanwhile , other countries across the world are getting on with producing saf at scale . when will the government get the mechanism in place , and will they meet their unambitious target of five saf plants by 2025 ? on moor farm roundabout in cramlington is not for the faint - hearted . in fact , many of my residents have told me that they actively avoid it . that is exactly why i had the roundabout cleaned and re - marked recently ; however , more work needs to be done . will my hon . friend meet me to discuss a more permanent solution , and the progress that i have made with northumberland county council and national highways ? as someone who knows that roundabout very well , i would be delighted to meet my hon . friend , and to ensure that the good work that northumberland county council is doing to upgrade and improve the area continue . before we move on , i wish to make a short statement about the speaker ’s chaplain , the venerable patricia hillas . this morning , downing street announced that his majesty the king has appointed the rev. canon hillas as the next bishop of sodor and man . i am sure that members will agree that the rev. canon hillas — tricia , our friend — has been an amazing colleague , and has faced during her tenure some of the most turbulent , challenging and celebratory times in our history : the impact on the parliamentary community of covid ; the murder of our much - loved colleague sir david amess ; the deaths of her majesty queen elizabeth and the duke of edinburgh ; and of course the coronation of his majesty king charles iii . at every gathering , in all circumstances , tricia has had a calming presence , exuding her trademark warmth and giving wise counsel to mps and staff alike . tricia will be consecrated as the bishop in october , and i am sure that we will all wish her joy on that occasion . she takes up her post on the isle of man , one of the oldest and smallest of the church of england ’s 42 dioceses , in the autumn . work on the recruitment of tricia ’s successor will follow in due course . i personally will miss tricia , and all the support and help that she has given me in my position . she has been not only a great speaker ’s chaplain , but a great friend ; we will all be united in thinking that . i am sure that the whole house would like to take this opportunity to wish tricia well . ( urgent question ): to ask the deputy foreign secretary if he will make a statement on the government ’s response to atrocity risks in el fasher , sudan . yesterday we published a written ministerial statement outlining our grave concern about reports of devastating violence in and around el fasher , with civilians caught in the crossfire . in april , the uk led negotiations , alongside mozambique , sierra leone and algeria , at the united nations security council to deliver a press statement that urged the warring parties to de - escalate in el fasher , and to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law . we also called for a closed un security council consultation on the situation . on “ spare sudan from their wilful destruction and carnage . ” we continue to pursue all diplomatic avenues to achieve a permanent ceasefire , and we welcome plans to restart talks in jeddah . we urge the region to refrain from actions that prolong the conflict and to engage positively in peace talks . we have used exchanges with the warring parties to condemn strongly atrocities that they have perpetrated , and to demand that their leadership makes every effort to prevent further atrocities in territories that they have captured or threatened to capture , as well as to press the need for improved humanitarian access . on finally , we will keep working to ensure that the voices of sudanese civilians are heard , whether they be survivors and witnesses of human rights abuses , sudanese non - governmental organisations , women ’s rights organisations , activists helping in their communities , or those trying to develop a political vision for sudan ’s future . uk technical and diplomatic support has been instrumental in the establishment of the anti - war , pro - democracy taqaddum coalition , led by former prime minister abdalla hamdok , and we will continue to support taqaddum ’s development . more than 1 million civilians are under immediate threat of massacre in el fasher . the opposition have been calling attention to the risks for several weeks . rsf plans have been slowed , due to pressure from the un , our diplomats and the united states , but that offensive is happening now at full pelt . we need the international partners with the most influence over the rsf to use their power now and stop the ongoing mass atrocities in el fasher . every state must surely recognise that the ongoing collapse of sudan into anarchy and famine is against its best interests , because the generals ’ war against the people of sudan is a blight on humanity . the us has set out a red line , promising “ direct and immediate consequences for those responsible for an offensive on el fasher . ” how will the government back that position ? we need more pressure put on both the warring parties to move towards an immediate ceasefire and granting humanitarian access . we need the government to consider all serious and rapid options for civilian protection . i genuinely believe that we need to support the resistance committees and emergency rooms . the deputy foreign secretary is a good man who genuinely understands what is at stake , but the opposition expect the uk ’s collective voice to be heard loud and clear at this time , in the very hours when this atrocity is under way , so how will the government act to protect civilians and ensure that our horror and anger are properly heard ? i thank the hon . lady for her questions and for her commitment to keeping this appalling situation firmly on the global radar . in april , the uk led negotiations at the un security council , delivering a press statement that urged the warring parties to de - escalate and to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law . as i said , we have called for a consultation in private in order to be able to move this forward . on we continue , of course , to work with a wide range of countries and bodies — including gulf and african partners , the intergovernmental authority on development , the african union and the un — to achieve a ceasefire , and at the same time and most importantly , we are increasing much - needed humanitarian assistance and access to protect civilians . we will continue to lead on the un security council , where we hold the pen on sudan . on i call the snp spokesperson . thank you and good morning , madam deputy speaker . we are in a crucial moment of atrocity prevention in sudan right now . the uk government must accept that what is happening is genocide . the uk government have been proactive in the delivery of aid and food to the civilians of sudan , but how are they reacting to the growing number of sudanese civilians facing famine and starvation , and what protections are in place to ensure that no more people are driven to catastrophic levels of hunger ? the challenge of food security is at the heart of the most urgent humanitarian work . the recent integrated food security phase classification projection for sudan indicates that the intense conflict and organised violence has driven nearly 18 million people into high levels of acute food insecurity , so we provided £ 42.6 million in humanitarian funding in the past financial year . of that , £ 12.2 million was destined for unicef for life - saving nutrition activities , and approximately £ 23.5 million was for the sudan humanitarian fund for a multi - sector response , including a high proportion of food security interventions . the ongoing and developing crisis in sudan is being fuelled by weapons from foreign supporters who continue to flout the un arms embargo on darfur . how are the government utilising their un security council position as penholder on sudan to prevent the flow of arms to the rapid support forces ? the hon . lady asks an incredibly important question . of course , a long - standing uk arms embargo is in place for the whole of sudan , as well as a un arms embargo on darfur , and we will continue , as i say , to use all our diplomatic tools at the un security council and with international partners to highlight that . as the deputy foreign secretary has said , there are now clear signs of ethnic cleansing in darfur , and the continued flow of weapons allows that threat to continue for longer than we want , so we will continue to press in that area . our heart goes all out to all those who are , tragically , being ethnically cleansed from parts of sudan . bearing in mind our historical connections with that part of the world , what direct action will his majesty ’s government take , working with the united states , the united nations , the african union and others , to ensure the safety of christians , who are being murdered and forced out of their homes ? surely it is time for britain to show leadership . the challenge that my hon . friend has raised is such an important and difficult one . we continue to work closely with a wide range of non - governmental organisations and un partners on conflict and atrocity prevention , and on these really important questions around losses of religious freedom . we are systematically prioritising atrocity monitoring and reporting , and are continuing to increase our capacity when it comes to human rights and atrocity prevention investment . we want to complete that assessment in - country in order to inform how we can continue to expand the strategy and be very clear that all those who are committing these terrible crimes will be held to account . the scale of the humanitarian situation in el fasher is horrific and demands urgent action . at the same time , sudan is at the centre of a series of interlocking and interdependent humanitarian crises that blight the whole horn of africa . last week , the all - party parliamentary group for africa , which i chair , convened a high - level summit to look at the issues of resilience and conflict in the horn of africa , and highlighted particular issues around engagement with grassroots groups and increasing ethnic polarisation . the minister is here on behalf of the deputy foreign secretary , and she is a friend of the appg ; on his behalf , can she commit that he will meet with the appg to discuss the incredibly important actions that the british government can take ? i am sure that in the absence of the deputy foreign secretary , i can afford his diary secretaries the opportunity to find a slot . i hope that the appg , which will be doing incredibly important work scanning across a range of channels , will have the opportunity to meet with alison blackburne , who is our uk special envoy for the horn of africa , sudan and the red sea . we ask her to do that incredibly important work from there ; it has been impossible to have a special envoy within sudan , but she is a great and experienced advocate , and i will try to make sure that that meeting takes place as soon as possible . i thank the minister very much for her answer . will she outline what further steps the government can take when the elderly , the ill , those who are ill - equipped , the disabled and civilians are taking to the streets in an attempt to stand against the paramilitaries and to protect their hospitals and vulnerable people who are without aid ? it is not a question of if the city falls , but when , so how can we get medical aid and support to those hospitals and vulnerable people at this very important time ? the hon . member highlights one of the most difficult aspects of this issue : the challenge of getting relevant humanitarian access where it is needed . currently , access into sudan remains highly constrained ; port sudan is the primary entry point for relief supplies , and onward distribution from there continues to prove challenging . movement is limited , but the investment has been made , and of course , through our relationships and all the diplomatic tools that we use , we continue to work on finding ways to support those who are most vulnerable . i congratulate my hon . friend nearly 100 humanitarian groups in sudan have warned elon musk that he risks collectively punishing millions of sudanese by shutting down his vital starlink satellite internet service in that war - ravaged country . have the government have raised our concerns about the devastation that that would cause to civilians and humanitarian aid agencies ? we will absolutely be raising the challenge of having those communication lines open . there are real concerns , and i will happily take this up with the deputy foreign secretary when he gets back . those of us who have constituents of sudanese origin can relate to the minister the distress and concern in that community . there is particular concern about the fact that — i think this is now the estimate — anything between 500,000 and 1 million refugees are going from darfur into chad . could the minister explain what support we are providing for those who are in chad , because at the moment it looks as though the agencies that are there are unable to cope ? the right hon . gentleman raises a very important point . i can update him that the deputy foreign secretary has recently been to the chad - sudan border to see for himself exactly the flow that the right hon . gentleman identifies . he saw the “ sheer horror ” and “ misery”—his words , not mine — that these appalling acts have created , and he is very focused on ensuring that we use our humanitarian aid to think about how we can provide support across every part of this terrible situation . i intend no disrespect to the minister , but the government ’s response just does not seem to be as robust as it could be given the severity of the situation in sudan , which is horrific . she will have read reports in the guardian about children — alive children — being “ piled up and shot ” by rsf paramilitaries in el geneina . what mechanisms are the government considering to prevent this genocide from spreading to el fasher ? as the hon . gentleman highlights , this is an appalling situation . i have just highlighted , in relation to the deputy foreign secretary ’s visit , the sheer horror and misery being wrought on these innocent people across the area , which is absolutely beyond words . as i say , there are now very clear signs of ethnic cleansing and appalling humanitarian abuses . we are providing support for the gathering of evidence , and we will continue to try to support those gathering information on the ground — be they ngos or civilians — to make sure that those who are committing the atrocities will be held to account . as i understand it , previous regional efforts to agree on the deployment of a peace- keeping force in sudan were rebuffed last year , but i find it incredibly hard to see how ever - escalating atrocity and indeed catastrophe can be avoided without one . is that even on the agenda now , because otherwise it seems to me we are talking here not so much about atrocity prevention as about atrocity monitoring ? as i say , we have continued to raise this at recent meetings of the un security council , and decisions on how to move forward to provide protection for innocent people will be taken with international partners . with thousands of women being killed in this war , the catastrophic humanitarian crisis particularly impacting women and the fact that women comprise over 70 % of the internally displaced people in sudan , what measures are the government taking to protect women in el fasher ? the hon . lady raises a really important point about an incredibly worrying situation . women and girls are at particular risk of a significant escalation in gender - based violence . in july last year , the uk and 15 of other members of the international alliance on preventing sexual violence in conflict published a statement urging all parties to prevent violence , particularly sexual violence , and to ensure immediate humanitarian access . this issue continues to be at the front of the deputy foreign secretary ’s mind and of the minds of all of our team , and we have pivoted our bilateral programme delivery to ensure that women and girls are at the heart of the support we are providing . i thank the minister for answering the urgent question . will the leader of the house give us the forthcoming business ? the business for the week commencing the house will rise for the whitsun recess at the conclusion of business on the provisional business for the week commencing may i join mr speaker in thanking the speaker ’s chaplain , the rev. canon patricia hillas , for all her wise counsel and support through some difficult and celebratory moments in her time as chaplain ? we all wish her well on her elevation . i also congratulate i also thank all those members who took part in the debate on risk - based exclusions on monday . we had a good discussion . the house has now taken the view that a process of risk assessment for members under arrest for serious sexual and violent offences shall be put in place . since monday , i have been struck by how many women , in less privileged or powerful positions than mine , have approached me to say thank you , and how that decision has changed how they feel about working here . it might not always feel like it , but there is a watching audience wanting to see us , as a workplace and as employers , make progress on those issues . this week we did . last week , the leader of the house and i launched a guide for mps and candidates on tackling conspiracy theories . we agreed that conspiracy theories are a form of radicalisation , and we must all do everything we can to combat them . is she therefore as disappointed as i am to see does the leader of the house think it is acceptable to members that on the evening before the first day of the remaining stages of the criminal justice bill , members did not know which or what amendments were to be debated ? this is an important bill with a number of significant back - bench and government proposals on issues of wide public concern , such as cuckooing , dangerous cycling , ninja swords , abortion , and one - punch manslaughter . the bill came out of committee in january . why has it taken so long to get to report ? having taken so long , why were members left completely in the dark about what would be discussed and when ? with more than 180 pages of amendments , including 22 new government changes published very late the night before , that is no way to run business and it is deeply disrespectful to members . it is just another symptom of the chaos at the heart of this government ’s operation and the disregard they hold for this house , and that is just day one of our consideration of the bill . why is there such a further delay to day two ? we should be doing it next week , not in another three . extended drinking hours for the euros are welcome , but that does not need to be considered on the floor of the house . is that because the government have more handling concerns and they are worried about defeats on the criminal justice bill , or is it because , even during the euros , they could not organise a booze - up in a brewery ? will the leader of the house assure the house that any further amendments or programming changes for day two will be published in good time ? the future business is yet again so light that it is almost laughable , but it is actually not that funny . the country faces huge headwinds . families are in a cost of living crisis , millions linger on nhs waiting lists and communities are beset by problems , yet the government of the day seem to have nothing they want to change , nothing they are in a hurry to sort out and nothing to bring to this house . these could , we hope , be the last few months that the conservatives are in power for some years . do they really have nothing they want to do with it ? if they have nothing that they want to use their parliamentary majority for , why are they even bothering to hold on to it ? i assume that the hon . lady will have informed the member whom she referred to that she was going to do so ? i did . excellent . first , may i send my good wishes for a full and speedy recovery to prime minister fico following the horrific attempt on his life ? i echo the comments from the hon . lady regarding the speaker ’s chaplain and wish her well on her next chapter . i thank mr speaker for his statement this morning , which was very helpful . i also thank anthony wickins and his colleagues for coming to parliament this week to promote and help us all understand the importance of dementia support in this important week . i join the hon . lady in thanking not just the two lead members , but all members who helped to bring forward the important report on birth trauma , which has had a huge response across the country . i know that not just the prime minister and ministers on the front bench , but many organisations concerned with the care of mums - to - be and new mums are taking this report seriously . i hope it will do much good on this important matter . the hon . lady mentioned my hon . friend the hon . lady talks about the criminal justice bill . she will understand that it is normal for the government to talk to people proposing amendments before a bill comes back , but that does not mean work is not being done on the bill . the bill deals with complex issues , and members will of course be given a good opportunity to have oversight on any amendments or changes being brought forward . the hon . lady talks about business being light . i just remind her that in this short final session of this parliament , we have already introduced more bills than labour ’s last four sessions in office by a considerable margin . if business collapses , it is not the fault of those on the government benches , but those who are here to oppose . we have even had that happen in opposition day debates . it is our business , and we are getting it through the house . if it takes less time because the opposition fail to show up , that is not our problem . today , we have had the leader of the opposition setting out his first steps , but he has already been on quite a journey . he got on at islington north with a flexible principles ticket . he claims that he is taking his party and us to dover and deal , but it is becoming clear that , due to industrial action , fewer trains under a labour government and running out of other people ’s money , he will have to join a rail replacement bus service terminating at rayners lane . i hope for the sake of those at dover waiting on a promise of a train that will never arrive that there is a compensation scheme in place — perhaps a daily allowance in the other place . i do not think that the public , who have long memories , will fall for the stunt going on in parallel to business questions . they have long memories and can look at what is happening in labour - run wales . they will not fall for today ’s pledge card . economic stability ? the author of the “ there is no money ” note still sits on labour ’s benches . cut waiting lists ? the only nhs cuts that labour has ever made have been not to waiting lists but to its budget ; it cut the nhs budget three times . border security command ? labour would end the new systems command and legislation that is having an effect on small boats , even when it agrees that that is working . public ownership of energy ? how is that working out for nottingham council ? tackle antisocial behaviour ? under labour , crime was twice what it is now . those in a labour police and crime commissioner area are 40 % more likely to be a victim of crime . new teachers ? there were 30,000 fewer teachers under labour than there are now . labour has plans to tax education , destroying a ladder for many children and increasing the burden on the state sector . there is nothing there — no vision , no plan and no principles on which to steer — which is why that pledge card will go the way of all the others . with apologies to the beatles , this leader of the opposition is a nowhere man , sitting in his nowhere land , making all his nowhere plans for nobody . he does n’t have a point of view . he ’s no good for me or you . judging by this latest pledge card , he is nowhere near good enough for britain . in this dementia action week , will a minister come to the dispatch box and talk about plans to ensure that the nhs is ready to roll out early diagnoses of dementia so that people can benefit from potentially transformative drugs such as lecanemab , which , for the first time , will treat the actual condition rather than just the symptoms ? i thank my right hon . friend for raising awareness of that important point . we have new opportunities through these fantastic new drugs and therapies that are coming online and it is vital that people have access to them . it is also important that we learn from the huge amount of research into dementia support , which not only can be hugely beneficial to those with dementia and their families and carers but will save the nhs billions . i call the snp spokesperson . first , i will take up the leader of the house on last week ’s offer of a deeper briefing with a minister on what she described as “ some minor issues to resolve”—[official report , in the border operating model . if , as she told me last week , she is paying “ great attention ” to what is going on and still did not see huge lorries as they wait 20 hours at border posts , perhaps she should take a trip to barnard castle . i would like to take the chief executive officer of the cold chain federation , whose members certainly do not agree with her that there are no fundamental issues to sort out , with me to that briefing to deliver a dose of reality . may we have a debate in government time on the careful use of words in politics ? the prime minister has refused to apologise for his offensive outburst on monday when he quite deliberately associated the scottish government with hamas terrorists , north korea and the iranian revolutionary guard corps . the good folk of edinburgh north and leith have elected a dangerous extremist — who knew?—along with the vast majority of mps from scotland who also want independence . all along , we thought that we were democratically elected members of this house , just like the leader of the house . madam deputy speaker , you might think that the conservatives of brexit britain would respect a nation ’s right to self - determination as a perfectly honourable political position . is it just scotland ’s that they do not respect ? we will always defend our nation ’s best interests . maybe that is what terrifies the pm and the likes of the scotland secretary , who wants to force ruinously expensive , untried nuclear reactors on renewables - rich scotland . now , he is frightening our bairns with threats of a unionist regime and scottish labour back in power to push through our overlords ’ cunning plans — what a better together reunion that would be . would the leader of the house remind me what happened to that respect agenda ? it would almost be funny if it were not coming from this particular government : an unknown number of prisoners let loose around england , the home office losing thousands of migrants under its watch , and an english courts and justice system on the verge of collapse . but what is on the prime minister ’s new hate list ? what keeps tories awake at night with fear ? people like me , apparently . how laughable . could the leader of the house confirm whether she believes that the prime minister was right to associate scottish democrats with hamas terrorists and the iranian revolutionary guard , or will she take the opportunity to distance herself from this laughably desperate baloney ? let me first reassure the hon . lady that , first , there is nothing wrong with my eyesight and , secondly , she does not keep me awake at night . could i draw her attention to the news this week that the eurozone economy is growing half as fast as britain ? let me repeat that : the eurozone economy is growing half as fast as britain . the snp ’s time would be better spent not trying to re - fight past referendums of all types but focusing on the issues today , such as the housing emergency that has just been declared in scotland due to its rent control policy . the hon . lady raised the very serious matter of the prime minister ’s language . i understand that , thanks to the scottish government , people can now fill in a hate report form . if she has any concerns , she can just fill in a report and pile more work on to her hard - pushed police officers . on the plans to put a nuclear power station in scotland , it is sensible to plan for a unionist party to be in government in scotland . given the timescales involved in nuclear construction , that is a sensible and pragmatic thing to do . it is clear to everyone , except the snp , that the party is in its final death throes . i predict that at the tragic finale , when the snp finally completely implodes and meets its end , there will still be no ferry to carry its members across the styx . tourism is a vital component of bournemouth ’s economy , and half of visitors to our fantastic seaside resort come by car . but if bournemouth , christchurch and poole council gets its way , bournemouth could soon be subject to a default 20 mph speed limit , which will simply slow everything down . we will all spend more time stuck in traffic , increasing pollution , rather than at our destinations . we already have designated 20 mph zones around schools , for example , but a default limit across the town would not just impact on the visitor experience , but slow down public transport , delivery vans and parents doing the school run . the policy did not work in wales , and it will not work in bournemouth . please may we have a debate on councils imposing unwanted speed limits ? i am sorry to hear that this is happening in my right hon . friend ’s constituency . one would hope that local authorities would learn from mistakes made elsewhere , and stop inflicting policies that do not work and cause huge damage to public services and the local economy . i am sorry to hear that his council is determined to press ahead with this . the experience has been dreadful in wales , where there have been deep concerns from the emergency services , which have found it difficult to go about their business , and massive costs have been piled on to business . i call the chair of the backbench business committee . i thank the leader of the house for making the business statement , for announcing the backbench business debates next i was also wondering if the leader of the house would join me in — a pleasant little thing from my perspective — wishing the warmest congratulations to gateshead football club , who were victorious and lifted the fa trophy at wembley last saturday ? i thank the hon . gentleman for his very helpful advert for forthcoming backbench business debates . i will , of course , join him — i think the whole house will join him — in celebrating this wonderful achievement by his much - loved club , gateshead . we send our congratulations . may i first thank both the leader of the house and the shadow leader of the house for their kind cross - party support for our landmark report this week into birth trauma ? the all - party parliamentary group on birth trauma published a major report called , “ listen to mums : ending the postcode lottery on perinatal care ” . this is the first cross - party report by mps on the issue , and we received over 1,300 submissions from the public . i am delighted that the prime minister announced yesterday that there will now be a comprehensive national maternity strategy , which we asked for in our recommendations . will my right hon . friend provide government time for a debate to discuss the important recommendations made in our national inquiry ? may i also ask her to write to the prime minister and ask him to confirm that he has now read the report in full , and to ensure that our recommendations are being implemented to improve aftercare for mothers in this country ? i know the whole house would want to extend our thanks to my hon . friend for this landmark piece of work . i will certainly make sure that the prime minister has studied the report in detail . when i last visited my hon . friend ’s constituency , i had the privilege of not just meeting her lovely daughter , but the man who saved my hon . friend ’s life . this is a very important report and i hope its recommendations will be implemented swiftly . may i lift the mood of the leader of the house this morning ? she seems a bit down . can we have more of a celebration of the people who work here ? they are now going to have greater protection in one part of their lives , but is it not about time we looked around us every day at everyone in this palace who works here : the people who clean this place , the security people , the clerks ? we have so many people with long - term service in this place . yes , we could have a debate , but is there a way we could do something to make the lives of these people who give us so much better ? i would be very happy to raise the hon . gentleman ’s suggestion with the house of commons commission to see what more we can do . i thank him for giving us the opportunity , which i hope is echoed by all in this chamber , to put on record our thanks for everyone who works on the estate to enable us to do our jobs and keep british democracy going . the seret international israeli film festival runs for a couple of weeks from today . wonderful independent films will be shown in arthouse cinemas across the world . but of course antisemites are trying to bully and intimidate cinema chains into not showing the films and , in some cases , are sadly succeeding . would the curzon or picturehouse cinema chains decline to show films made by the black community because of a war in africa ? obviously , the answer is no , and the reason is because that would be racist . so it is with those sick antisemites whose loathing for jewish people is so extreme that they are now trying to boycott jewish culture in the uk . will my right hon . friend agree to organise a debate in this place to support jewish art and culture ? perhaps parliament could even show one of the independent films , which have nothing to do with the conflict in the middle east , here in one of the committee rooms , for example . i thank my right hon . and learned friend for giving us a very good example of how antisemitism gets a hold . it starts with things like this , which might seem a reasonable thing for a venue to do but clearly is not . the way he sets it out illustrates why it is not . it is really disturbing and i hope that all members recognise that this community is really under attack . we need to be absolutely unequivocal and say that we stand with them , and that we will do everything we can to protect them and call out antisemitism wherever it is . this is mental health awareness week , and bath mind , a wonderful charity in my constituency that supports 6,000 people , is worried about the reform of personal independence payments , which may plunge thousands of families into destitution and homelessness — with the associated mental health impact — and affect the charity ’s capacity to deliver services in the face of increased demand . may we have a debate in government time about the pip reforms and their impact on mental health ? as the hon . lady will know , many of the reforms introduced by the department for work and pensions to provide support have massively increased the number of people with a mental health condition or hidden disability who are able to access that support , and that is a good thing . however , i thank her for raising an important matter during an important week , and i will ensure that those in the dwp have heard what she has said . the leader of the house may be aware that cramlington , which is in my constituency and is one of the largest towns in northumberland , lacks a police station . its stand - alone police station was closed in 2014 . more recently , northumbria police opened an office in manor walks shopping centre , but it is not an adequate replacement for a full station . despite the critical need , successive labour police and crime commissioners in northumbria have not taken action to reverse the closure . given cramlington ’s population of more than 30,000 and its history of serious crimes including multiple murders , its residents are in desperate need of a dedicated police station to provide reassurance and support for neighbourhood officers . will the leader of the house please schedule a debate in government time so we can consider what can be done to ensure that constituencies nationwide receive the necessary resources to combat crime ? my hon . friend will know that the government have confirmed a total police funding settlement of up to £ 18.5 billion for the coming financial year , an increase of £ 886 million on the previous year ’s settlement , and overall the police funding available to police and crime commissioners is up by 6.3 % in cash terms . the resource is there , and we know that with that resource our incredible police forces are halving crime . except in a few areas notably controlled by labour , we are making good progress , but of course these community facilities are extremely important to the communities that they serve . i will ensure that the home secretary has heard my hon . friend ’s specific point , and i will write to him this afternoon . blackpool rock is under threat from cheap imitation imports from china in particular , and i have joined stanton & novelty , a third - generation traditional confectionery manufacturer in my constituency , in leading the charge in safeguarding the status of british - made confectionery . our seven remaining rock factories are at risk of closure and are experiencing a 40 % drop in sales , which is jeopardising the livelihoods of local employees and the viability of historic businesses . just 50 people in the uk have the skills required to properly “ letter ” sticks of rock , most of them in blackpool . these traditional skills will soon be lost without intervention , so may we have a debate in government time to discuss securing our historic british confectionery , and save blackpool rock ? hear , hear ! for the benefit of hansard , i should emphasise that the hon . gentleman ’s question was met with roars of approval from members in all parts of the house , and i thank him for raising an important issue . this is an iconic project : everyone knows what blackpool rock is , and i shall certainly ensure that the relevant minister has heard about the hon . gentleman ’s campaign . last thursday , i accompanied the secretary of state for business and trade on her visit to my constituency , and we toured the port of immingham . immingham is the largest port in the country , and the humber ports contribute £ 75 billion to the national economy . may we have a debate in government time on our port industry and the benefits it gives to international trade ? i thank my hon . friend for raising this matter . our ports play a vital role in the long - term growth of the economy , and provide essential access to global markets . i know that this issue is a focus for many members across the house , even those without a port in their constituency . it would be a very good topic for a debate , and my hon . friend will know how to apply for one . it is mental health awareness week — an opportunity for us all to redouble our efforts to tackle the stigma and call for improved mental health service provision . unfortunately , thousands of people , including my constituents in battersea , are paying the price for the government ’s incompetence and failure to deliver their manifesto commitment to update the mental health act 1983 . the crisis needs to be addressed . can we have a government statement on the actions that will be taken to address this crisis ? when will the government finally bring forward the mental health bill ? i thank the hon . lady for raising this issue . i know that many hon . members across the house have spent a great deal of time on the bill , including those who were directly involved in the pre - legislative scrutiny of it . we will bring forward further business and announce it in the usual way . in the meantime , i will make sure that all the relevant secretaries of state , not just the secretary of state for health and social care , have heard the hon . lady ’s ask today . this week care4calais , a pro - asylum seeker british charity , contacted me to ask for my support for its legal efforts to prevent the deportation to rwanda of asylum seekers in dudley whom the government have assessed for deportation . i do not think the charity got the memo . as a result , i have written to the home secretary , asking him to speed up the deportations . can we have a debate on how we can stop organisations such as care4calais — which , as a charity , either directly or indirectly receives government funding — actively undermining government policy to stop illegal migration ? i thank my hon . friend for making those points , and i will make sure that the home secretary has heard them . he will know that the processing that has been going on in the home office has speeded up immensely — by close to 300 % during the prime minister ’s tenure . those cases are being cracked through , but we can not have a system with finite resource that allows endless appeals . that is why we have brought forward legislation and why those who have exhausted the process , who should not be here and who do not have the right to be here , need to be sent either home or to a third country . that is very clear , and the legislation will enable us to make best use of the finite resource that we have . i am going to give it one more try . given that the prime minister now thinks that around half of the people in scotland , who believe that it should be a self - governing , independent country , are extremists , will the leader of the house make a statement setting out whether she agrees with his assessment ? can she confirm , for the purposes of clarity , whether she believes that those who wish to rejoin the eu are also dangerous extremists in our midst ? the union of the united kingdom is critical to our strength . were it to be torn apart , which is the prime objective of those on the snp benches , we would be weaker as a nation and the component parts of the united kingdom would be weaker . scotland would be weaker , england would be weaker , wales would be weaker and northern ireland would be weaker . that is certainly a threat to our stability , which is what the prime minister said . if the hon . lady thinks he said something else , she can fill in a hate form . hear , hear ! i thank my hon . friend for doing that . as he heard very clearly , we all send our good wishes , thanks and appreciation to both terry and nick for their incredible service to this house . neither the leader of the house nor anybody else in this house needs any reminding of the risks and dangers of political violence , so i am sure she will share the concerns of the whole house following yesterday ’s assassination attempt on the slovakian prime minister . this incident is the latest example of political violence across europe , and it has brought into sharp focus the heightened and growing threat to politicians across the political spectrum . given that , does the leader of the house think it would be timely for a minister to update the house on the important work being done by the defending democracy taskforce to keep politicians safe in our country ? i thank the hon . gentleman for raising this very important point . he will know that not only the defending democracy taskforce but the house authorities , our security and intelligence agencies , the home office and many other bodies are very focused on ensuring that not only us in this place but all elected individuals have the protection they need to go about their business . the hon . gentleman will know that some issues can not be aired on the floor of the house , but i will make sure that all the departments involved have heard his request for the house to be updated . perhaps they could offer more in - depth briefings on matters that should not be aired on the floor of the house . earlier this week , i met guests from police uk disability sport who were hosted by my neighbour , my hon . friend more than £ 330 million was seized in 2023 , and £ 1.75 million could protect a five - year project to fund sports events . police uk disability sport is looking to create a police version of the invictus games called the intrepid games . may we have a debate on using proceeds of crime funding to help to establish opportunities for these amazing police officers ? what a good idea . i will make sure that the home secretary has heard it . it would be a fantastic initiative to have an invictus games for the fantastic police officers who are disabled , whether in service or through another situation . earlier this week , the secretary of state for scotland seemed to outline an intention to disregard democracy and run roughshod over devolution . the dangerous extremists on the snp benches believe that democracy is not a one - time event so , as we mark 25 years of the scottish parliament , could we have a debate in government time to consider how this place can better respect devolution as scotland advances towards becoming an independent nation ? that is shocking news about the secretary of state for scotland . i thought he was a man who respected the result of all referendums , which i think is supporting democracy . i think that a debate on how devolution is working and the possibilities for the future would be very well attended , and the chair of the backbench business committee is listening . i would just say that , when devolution was envisaged , the plan was set in place by parties and nations working together for the benefit of all , as opposed to working against each other . mr speaker has generously given permission for a reception to be held in speaker ’s house later this afternoon to mark the 50th anniversary of the spinal injuries association , which i am delighted to sponsor . stoke mandeville hospital in my constituency is home to the national spinal injuries centre and is the birthplace of the paralympics . will my right hon . friend the leader of the house join me in congratulating the spinal injuries association on half a century of work to support people who have spinal cord injuries and their loved ones , and does she agree that that is a topic worthy of debate in the house ? i thank my hon . friend for raising that important point . a debate on such a topic would be well attended and he knows how to apply for one . i am sure that all hon . members would join him in thanking the spinal injuries association and everyone who supports it for its incredible work to support people with such injuries . yesterday , the trussell trust came to parliament to update hon . members on the latest figures for the distribution of food parcels . it reported that more than 3.1 million emergency food parcels were provided by food banks in its network last year . in gateshead alone , 8,464 people needed support , of whom 2,694 were children . i pay tribute to the important work being done by the trussell trust , the gateshead food bank and other charities , such as feeding families , in my constituency . can we have a debate in government time on how we can end the need for food banks ? i thank the hon . lady for raising that important issue . she will know that the government have put together a cost of living support package , which now stands at £ 108 billion , and that the household support fund enables local authorities to give grants directly to individuals who might fall through the cracks . we have taken other measures , such as our reform of welfare . the large share of people who were going to food banks under the last labour government were being transferred from one benefit to another , which is a situation that we have ended . there are also more sustainable alternatives to food banks in most communities . there is still an issue and there is more work to be done , and i will take what the hon . lady has said to the relevant secretary of state ’s attention . may we have a debate in government time on the greenway landfill site ? i am grateful to councillor becky clarke , ben collins , who was the stig in a former life , and the sampford peverell church of england primary school for standing up against it . mid devon district council , which is not the ultimate authority for this , has been absolutely useless , as usual . in fact , the former chair of its scrutiny committee , who was supposed to be scrutinising it , has done a runner . i am not surprised : it turns out that , according to locals , she was sacked from the national farmers union and the environment agency , and then sued it . i have gone on and on about local government not standing up for local people , and i will continue to do so . it is something that we need to talk about , so please can we have time for a debate ? my hon . friend makes a good case , not necessarily for a debate on that topic but for an entire debate — perhaps an entire afternoon on the floor of the house — about his council alone . as i do every week , i will make sure that the secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities has heard what he said . the guernsey cardiologist dr dean patterson has written to the general medical council to call for an immediate suspension of the mrna vaccines after witnessing at first hand in guernsey the damage that they have done . guernsey has only 63,000 residents , 93 % of whom have had at least two jabs . dr patterson stated that he saw only five cases of myocarditis a year until 2021 when the jabs were rolled out . he then saw a 500 % increase in cases : there were 25 cases in 2021 and 23 in 2022 , but in 2023 , when fewer jabs were administered , the number of cases dropped to 11 . because the channel islands are a crown dependency , they have no representation in this house . although the residents of the channel islands are british passport holders , they have no access to the uk vaccine damage compensation scheme . will the leader of the house make a statement on how dr patterson and other concerned medical professionals in the channel islands can publicise their concerns about these novel treatments and protect their patients , and how the people of the channel islands who have been harmed by the vaccines can get the compensation that they deserve ? the hon . gentleman has found his own answer . not only has he given an example of a healthcare professional who is writing to healthcare professional bodies , and many other organisations that scrutinise and have oversight of vaccines policy , but members of parliament can raise the issue on the floor of the house . it is very important that we ensure that the public know there are statutory bodies , third sector organisations and democratic organisations with elected representatives that have scrutiny and oversight of all these matters . that is why we have a very safe vaccines regime , and why any concerns about vaccines or ongoing trials are all put in the public domain . last week , a constituent who is dyspraxic came to my surgery to raise concerns about the lack of awareness of dyspraxia . that has been exacerbated by the collapse of the dyspraxia foundation , so there is now no dedicated dyspraxia organisation in the country . i would love to say that the trouble i had with my voter id was an ingenious way of raising awareness of dyspraxia , but it was not . will the leader of the house support those with dyspraxia by tabling a debate in government time to raise that awareness ? millions of people across the country have it — a huge number of our constituents — so will the leader of the house support me ? i am sorry to hear about the closure of the dyspraxia foundation . i know that my hon . friend will be doing all he can to ensure that people have the support and advice they need . i will certainly ensure that the secretaries of state for education and for health and social care have heard what he has said . he can raise this with them on next monday , having taken evidence for six years , sir brian langstaff will publish the final report on the contaminated blood scandal . it will be a momentous day for all those who have campaigned for so many decades to get that public inquiry . does the leader of the house know how the largest treatment disaster in the history of the nhs — and , i think , the biggest cover - up by the state — will be debated in the house ? will the prime minister be making a statement ? will the house have an opportunity for a full debate on sir brian ’s findings and recommendations ? may i thank the right hon . lady , her co - chair and the whole of the all - party parliamentary group on haemophilia and contaminated blood ? they have performed important work throughout the process , including through the inquiry we established and through looking at highly technical issues , the compensation study and the work that the paymaster general is doing to ensure that the scheme is properly established . it is hard to find an example that is more extreme than this appalling scandal and the successive decades of cover - up . there are still issues being uncovered and coming to light . monday will be an historic day — i wish it had come decades earlier , but it is happening on monday . although i can not give the right hon . lady exact answers to her questions , she can take it from me — i hope she understands that it is sincerely meant — that the report needs to be given the attention it warrants on the floor of the house . as i am sure the leader of the house is aware , today — the will the leader of the house also bring forward a debate in the house on making statutory provision for the restoration of middlesex as a ceremonial county , with its own lord lieutenant or deputy lieutenant , and indeed on all our treasured historic counties , ending the many years of confusion and loss of county identity ? this is particularly so in towns such as romford , which takes great pride in being part of the historic county of essex . i am very pleased to hear that the prime minister is continuing this tradition at downing street . it is important that we celebrate our counties and everything about their cultural identity : their food , their amazing landscapes and their heritage . having heard what my hon . friend has said today , i think there is no danger of our losing sight of that importance , with him on these benches . a significant issue across oldham , chadderton and royton is the rapid increase in the number of houses in multiple occupation . it was previously a big issue for our pub industry , with pubs being converted into hmos , but it is now increasingly an issue with family homes . those homes are being taken off the market and sold at inflated prices , because of their potential rental income , which drives the end value . the result in oldham is 500 children living in temporary accommodation in single hotel rooms , because of the lack of supply of family homes . this issue also brings into question the issue of serco ’s home office contracts . can we have a debate in government time on the overall impact of housing policy , which includes hmos , the lack of supply and the home office allocation policy ? the hon . gentleman raises an important matter . he is speaking to somebody who represents , bar london , the most densely populated city in europe , so i understand the issues he is talking about . he will know that we have done a number of things nationally to help ensure that , where hmos are being built , they are of good quality and do not cram people in — for example , the reforms that we have made to the valuation office agency and council tax rebanding . i recommend that he speaks to his local authority , which should have a clear map of where hmos are and have its own local policy about the density of those hmos . it has the powers to do that , and that is what it should do , and its planning committee should be making decisions on that basis . sadly , we all know that misogyny can lead to acts of violence and sexual attacks , and it is right in those circumstances that we use exclusions to safeguard staff and members in this place . but we should not forget that misogyny can also be part of everyday culture in workplaces in this country , where women are talked over , their ideas ignored until men put them forward , and inappropriate comments are made — so - called banter culture . all of that can lead to so much more , which we want to prevent . can the leader of the house set out what more the government want to do to attack that culture ? can we have a debate in government time to discuss how we can protect women in the workplace ? before the leader of the house responds , i just wish to say that we still have a statement and a debate to come . to ensure that everybody can get in , brief questions and brief answers would be helpful . the hon . lady raises an important matter . i am glad that we have taken measures to protect people who work here , and of course the environment in which people work is incredibly important . equalities question time was yesterday , but i will ensure that the government equalities office has heard what she has said and will raise it with the secretary of state . a constituent has contacted me about how he is remortgaging at an increased rate of 5.68 % . if he did not have ongoing cladding issues , his mortgage lender would have still given him an increased rate , but it would have been 4.67 % . an extra £ 600 will now be added to his monthly mortgage payments . i am confident that other people up and down our country are experiencing that double jeopardy , due to the conservative government ’s failings . will the leader of the house say what conversations she has had with her cabinet colleagues on this issue ? the hon . lady will know that ensuring that our economy is growing , inflation is curbed and interest rates can come down is a priority for the government , and she will know from the statement put out by the national audit office earlier this week that the plan is working . merthyr tydfil ’s old town hall , more recently known as the redhouse , is an iconic building with much historic significance . it was from the balcony of the building that keir hardie spoke to the people of merthyr tydfil after being elected to this place as the first labour mp in 1900 . this week , the merthyr tydfil leisure trust , the current tenant of the building , closed its doors — the latest episode in a catalogue of failure . my senedd colleague and i have written to the charity commission , asking it to investigate the failings of the merthyr tydfil leisure trust , but may we have a debate on what more can be done to bring this faceless and seemingly remote organisation to account ? i am sorry to hear about the issue in the hon . gentleman ’s constituency . he has done his community a service by raising the matter on the floor of the house and creating pressure for that dialogue to happen , and for heads to be cracked together in his local community to ensure that his constituents are better served . a few weeks ago , i brought up the case of my constituent who was savagely attacked by a former partner while on holiday in spain , and saved only by the intervention of five men from newcastle , whose statements , along with that of another witness , were never taken by the spanish police . we wrote to the foreign secretary to seek his assistance with persuading the spanish authorities to reopen the case to avoid a miscarriage of justice , but the reply that i received from the minister for europe , i am sorry to hear about the hon . gentleman ’s experience . i will certainly ensure that he gets a better service than that . before coming to this place , i was a modern foreign languages teacher — i taught in wigan and south wales . i absolutely loved it and took so many pupils overseas to give them that fantastic experience . may we have a debate in government time on what the government can do to enable young people to travel post brexit and have those opportunities , which are sadly missing now ? i admire the hon . lady ’s passion and thank her for her previous service . it is an excellent topic for a debate , because it would allow us to get on record the benefits of the turing scheme , which is now running — the same benefits that have been there before but on a global basis , not just focused on the eu . i briefly associate myself with the comments of my hon . friend as will concern anyone approaching retirement , figures from the department for work and pensions have revealed that the number of pensioners using food banks doubled after the government ’s economic mismanagement — up 101 % in my constituency . can we have a debate in government time on whether the £ 46 billion blackhole in the plan to axe national insurance will hit pensioners once more ? the hon . gentleman may like to talk to some more pensioners ; he may find out all sorts of things , because they have long memories . labour may not think that our elders have a good memory , but in fact they do . they remember the 25p rise to their pensions under the last labour government . they remember the pension credit maladministration — i think £ 10 million was owed to pensioners in my constituency alone . under the last labour government , 200,000 more pensioners were living in absolute poverty , and we had the fourth highest pensioner poverty in europe . pensioners also remember which party introduced the triple lock , increasing the state pension by £ 3,700 since 2010 : the conservatives . in 1900 , in this chamber , a bill was passed into law to promote alexandra palace as the people ’s palace for recreation forever — a palace for the people of london . it is now an international venue , but will the leader of the house and the shadow leaders of the house congratulate the staff , volunteers and everyone who makes this fantastic venue ? particularly in tough times when people can not take holidays as much , they can enjoy alexandra palace and park — and while they are at it , they can volunteer with the friends of ally pally station , to make the entrance to alexandra palace all the more beautiful . i thank the hon . lady for giving us all an opportunity to thank the staff , friends and volunteers of ally pally and park . she has given a great advert for anyone who is at a loose end and wants to do something for that community . my constituent rohanna had hoped to have her indefinite leave to remain application expedited , so that she could fly to the philippines to attend her father ’s funeral . my office put in an urgent inquiry , but got minimal interaction , and unfortunately my constituent had to attend the funeral online . it turns out that had the decision been made in time , the need for a biometric card would have prevented her from travelling anyway . can the leader of the house make sure that the urgent ilr application process is just that , and find a way for people to travel without a biometric residence card on compassionate grounds ? i am very sorry to hear that that happened to the hon . gentleman ’s constituent , particularly at such an awful time for them and their family . if he will give my office the details of the case , i will raise it with the department concerned and make sure they do a “ lessons learned ” exercise . we want to ensure that people are able to travel , especially at such moments . i was recently contacted by a constituent regarding her 16 - year - old son , who has sadly been diagnosed with hodgkin lymphoma . as if that was not enough to deal with , the chemotherapy started at the end of last month and he is taking his gcses right now . it is very difficult , and we have found a whole raft of rules regarding when his situation can be taken into account in those gcses . clearly he will miss some of the exams because of treatment or its effects . we have found out that the pathway is not at all clear and straightforward . on some occasions , only a certificate of recognition can be awarded , rather than an actual gcse . we would really like a debate about what more we can do to make sure that the pathway is made easier for children in very difficult circumstances and their parents . i am very sorry to hear that , and i am sure i speak for us all when i send our good wishes to the hon . gentleman ’s constituent and his family . my right hon . friend the secretary of state for education makes a timely appearance ; she may have saved me a stamp . however , i will write to her formally and make sure that she has heard what the hon . gentleman has said . he will know how to apply for a debate , and that is an excellent topic for one . northumbrian water repeatedly refused to release information on the scale of raw sewage dumping at whitburn and into the north sea . an appeal tribunal has ordered that data to be released , thanks to the persistent work of steve lavelle and the whitburn neighbourhood forum . the decision found that northumbrian water had a desire to “ avoid media or political attention ” . can we please have a debate on why the government have enabled water companies to not only dump sewage into our waters , but evade scrutiny ? first of all , what the hon . lady says about this government is not true . if she goes to the water uk website , she will see real - time information about the projects going on across the country with every water company . that is the largest infrastructure investment of its kind in the world , and it will dramatically reduce storm overflows . the reason why we have these releases , as she will well know , is because of legacy sewerage systems that mix storm water and waste water . we have to make the investment to put that right . when the conservatives came into office , less than 6 % of such overflows were monitored . that figure is now 100 % , and that information is in the public domain . fantastic local activists like steve — i have many in my constituency — are not only holding water companies to account , but working with them to improve monitoring . this would be an excellent topic for a debate , because we will very shortly eradicate that kind of overflow . the leader of the house re - registered her leadership campaign website on polling day , so can her colleagues look forward to more “ pints with penny ” over the coming weeks ? if not , she is more than welcome to a gin with gwynne . i am sure that the house is very keen to hear the story behind this , but i am afraid that what the hon . gentleman has said is not true . i have done no such thing . i have recently been contacted by constituents about the imminent closure of the hall , a small community space in east village , stratford — one of very few in the area . as we know , such spaces are absolutely invaluable . ours hosts loads of events , including meetings of the brownies and the girl guides . i am making representations to get living , the developer responsible for that decision . it has , frankly , been responsible for a whole bunch of questionable decisions over recent years , including during the cladding scandal and on exorbitant service charges . can we have a debate in government time on how the actions of developers have undermined the olympic legacy and failed local residents ? i am very sorry to hear of the situation in the hon . lady ’s constituency . she will know how to apply for a debate on the issue , which i think is an excellent topic for discussion . i will also ensure that the secretary of state for levelling up , housing and communities has heard her concerns . clearly , a huge amount of work has been done to enable community asset transfers , and funding is available to facilitate that . i will ask one of the secretary of state ’s officials to contact her office with any advice that they can furnish . i thank the leader of the house for this chance to ask an important question — all questions are important , and this one is on an important subject . this week , i would like us to turn our attention to vietnam . i am troubled by the recent arrest and conviction of christians belonging to the montagnard minority ethnic group for their peaceful advocacy of freedom of religion or belief in vietnam . one christian , mr bya , was targeted and killed , yet the local police have failed to make any arrests in relation to his death . will the leader of the house join me in condemning such violations of freedom of religion or belief , and will she ask the foreign , commonwealth and development office to raise the issue with its counterparts in vietnam ? i thank the hon . gentleman for shining a spotlight , as he does every week , on atrocities going on all over the world . i am very sorry to hear about the killing of that gentleman , and the response by the local authorities . as i do every week , i will ensure that the fcdo has heard his concerns , and i will raise the matter with the foreign secretary . my constituent mrs houria nicoll is an algerian - british dual national . she went to algeria to deal with the estate of her deceased parents , and travelled out on her algerian passport , as her british passport had expired . she has been denied entry to the uk on her algerian passport and is now stuck in algeria . she is unwell and can not access any care or support from family or friends . the british embassy has denied her help because of her dual status . time is running out . will the leader of the house do everything she can to work with her foreign office colleagues to give my constituent some support and get her home ? i am very sorry to hear about that . i will , after this session , ensure that the home office and the foreign office — particularly consular services — have heard the situation that the hon . lady describes . if she wants to give my office more details and the record of correspondence that she has had , we will do everything we can to ensure that she is given the right support to get her constituent home . on a point of order , madam deputy speaker . i am very grateful to you for allowing me to raise a point of order from the front bench . it relates to comments that the shadow leader of the house , i did write to my constituents over a year ago about a consultation that is being run by my local council on 15 to 20 - minute communities . in that letter , i pointed to some of the rumours about 15 - minute cities , because that is something that constituents have raised with me . that consultation is still live on the council ’s website — it is on page 45 of its planning and appraisals document — so this is very much a constituency - based issue . however , i find it very difficult to be accused of being a conspiracy theorist on the back of that , especially as the vaccines minister . whenever there is a debate in this place on that subject , the number of death threats and the amount of abuse that i get is overwhelming at times . i realise that colleagues sometimes have valid points to raise , but there is a backlash whenever those debates are held . more importantly , being linked to antisemitism when my family in london are actually jewish , and have had a very difficult time over the past few months , was devastating . i kindly ask the shadow leader of the house to either withdraw those statements , or just to reflect that while we all play politics in this space , sometimes things are very personal . does the shadow leader of the house wish to make a further point of order ? further to that point of order , madam deputy speaker . i thank i thank the hon . member for lewes for giving me notice of her point of order . i am glad that the shadow leader of the house was here to hear and respond to it . there are two important points . the first is on giving advance notice ; i did check with the shadow leader of the house that she had given advance notice . secondly , i hope that this has led to some clarification of what was said and what was meant . i am not responsible for what members say in the chamber , but i remind everybody that good temper and moderation are the characteristics of parliamentary language . i am sure that everybody in the chamber would agree with that . i think we will leave it at that . with your permission , madam deputy speaker , i will make a statement to the house setting out the government ’s proposals for updating the 2019 statutory guidance on relationships , sex and health education , which my department has published today for consultation . i thank my department ’s staff for their hard work in getting us to this point . this government have a plan to deliver a brighter future for britain , one where families are supported and given peace of mind that their children are safe , and are being equipped with the skills that they need to succeed . good relationships , sex and health education — rshe , as it is known — plays a key role in that . however , following disturbing reports from parents of pupils being taught inappropriate content in schools , and requests from schools that wanted more clarity about when to teach certain topics , the prime minister and i decided to bring forward the review of rshe . we have listened to colleagues from across government and the house , gathered evidence from stakeholders , and considered advice from an independent panel of experts who generously gave their time , experience and knowledge to support the review last year . i put on record my personal thanks to each individual panel member . we need to make sure that the content of lessons is factual and appropriate , and that children have the capacity to fully understand everything that they are being taught . we need to make sure that our children are prepared for the world in which they live , but not in a way that takes away the innocence of childhood . in short , we need to allow our children to be children . that is a fine line to tread , and schools need clarity on how to approach the issue . overall , this guidance is underpinned by three core values : first , that parents have a right to know what their children are being taught ; secondly , that teachers are there to teach children facts , not push the agendas of campaign groups ; and thirdly , that schools should not teach about the contested issue of gender identity , including that gender is a spectrum . there are five major policy changes that i would like to set out , the first of which is the introduction of age limits for teaching sensitive subjects . the purpose of the new age limits is to make sure children are not taught things before they are ready to understand them . informed by the advice of the independent panel and others , the guidance places specific age limits on the teaching of certain subjects . in primary schools , children learn about the importance of boundaries and privacy and that they have rights over their own bodies , but no 10 - year - old should be taught about the details of intimate sexual acts , sexual harassment or sexual violence . in primary schools , sex education is not a requirement , and should only be introduced from year 5 onwards . its content should align with the national curriculum ’s science teachings on conception and birth , ensuring that it is rooted in fact . it should absolutely not be preparing primary - age children for sexual activity . the second flagship change is complete openness with parents . parents are their children ’s first teachers , and they must know what they are being taught . the guidance contains a new section that makes the need for transparency with parents crystal clear and clarifies the scope within the law to share materials . the bottom line is that curriculum providers should not be seeking to hide their materials from parents . that practice is completely unacceptable : parents have a fundamental right to know what their children are being taught about healthy relationships , sex and development . the third area is teaching about gender reassignment . many schools have told us that they need clear guidance to help them teach about this highly sensitive and complex issue in a way that is factual and safe . we are making it absolutely clear that the contested topic of gender identity should not be taught in schools at any age . schools should not be providing classroom materials that , for example , include the view that gender is a spectrum . while protected characteristics such as gender reassignment should be taught about , that must be done on a factual basis at an appropriate age and must not be based on contested ideology . that reflects the cautious , common - sense approach that we have taken in our guidance on children questioning their gender , and also reflects the recommendations of the cass review . there is also a dedicated section on sexual harassment and sexual violence . the growth of malign influencers online who pose a risk to children and young people has been significant . it is one of the key ways in which the world has changed for young people since the guidance was originally published — and , indeed , since all of us members were in school . that new section covers some specific types of abusive behaviour that were not previously discussed , such as stalking , as well as advice for teachers about how to address dangerous , misogynistic online influencers . i would now like to consider the sensitive , but important , issue of suicide prevention . ministers and i have met bereaved families , experts and teachers to explore how suicide prevention could be taught as part of rshe , and i pay tribute to the incredible work of 3 dads walking , who have used the unimaginable tragedies in their lives to campaign for important change . the current rshe guidance already includes content about teaching pupils to look after their mental wellbeing and support themselves and their friends . we have now made clearer how that content on mental wellbeing relates to suicide prevention . of course , the topic of suicide itself needs to be handled sensitively and skilfully , and not before pupils are ready to understand it . obviously , children ’s maturity varies , but our engagement suggested that children typically develop the necessary understanding from when they are in year 8 . we have made sure that the updated guidance acknowledges that it can be important to discuss this topic with pupils , and have added advice to set out how schools could address suicide prevention in their teaching . finally , the guidance also includes the new topic of personal safety , which covers additional content on understanding the laws on carrying knives and knife crime , and on the dangers of fire , roads , railways and water . together , i am confident that this guidance will give teachers and headteachers clarity about what should and should not be taught . it will provide parents with the peace of mind that their children are being taught in a safe and factual manner , and it will reassure everyone across society that pupils are being taught what they need to know at the right age and time in their lives . a copy of the guidance has been deposited in the libraries of both houses . i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow minister . i thank the secretary of state for advance sight of her statement . labour ’s approach starts from the belief that education should prepare our children for the world in which they live and the future that they , together , will shape . to achieve that , and to give each and every child the opportunity and the future they deserve , relationships , sex and health education must be an integral part of every child ’s education . the content of such education must be both age - appropriate and taught in a respectful manner , as well as tailored to the realities of children ’s lives . the secretary of state has set out that the government intend to achieve this through the introduction of age limits on certain aspects of this curriculum . today ’s statement has been long in the making . alongside school leaders , we have consistently pushed for clearer guidance on these issues to be introduced so school leaders and teachers can feel confident and supported in what they are teaching . while we are pleased that the guidance has at last been published , there is deep concern about the lack of consultation with school leaders in developing the guidance so far . if the government are serious about ensuring that rshe is taught in a dignified and respectful manner , and in a way that schoolteachers and school leaders feel they can confidently deliver , they must ensure that the voices of school leaders and teachers are heard . i want to ask the secretary of state to address a couple of concerns in particular . the first concern arises from the reality that education is one of our strongest levers for preventing child abuse . it is crucial at a time of rising levels of sexual offences against children , especially our youngest children , that children are empowered to recognise when something is not right . the secretary of state will know that sometimes such issues arise urgently , in a class or a wider school community , outside the timeline that a teacher may have in mind , and perhaps even before the age limits she is proposing . so will she say something about the ability of teachers to respond to and reflect such concerns in future in the context of age limits , especially when they arise among younger children ? the second concern is about the importance of children learning not just about their own relationships tomorrow , but about their own and other people ’s families today . the opposition believe that what matters about families is not the shape they have , but the love they give . teaching children about the facts of the world in which they grow up must include an understanding that there are people who are transgender , that people can go through a process to change their gender and that the law provides for that . the secretary of state outlined a little of her thinking in her statement and on radio 4 this morning , but could she set it out in more detail for the house ? on some of the other issues raised by this guidance , labour very much welcomes the intention of the guidance to remove the barriers that some parents face when asking what is being taught to their children . of course parents should know what their children are being taught . while providers are already required to do this , it is acknowledged that there have been issues with interpretations of copyright legislation , and it is absolutely right that ministers seek to clarify this issue . we also welcome the fact that there will be additional content on suicide prevention in the secondary curriculum , as well as on the risks of self - harm and suicide content on social media . however , it needs to be backed up with support in schools to adequately address the challenges that far too many children and young people face with their mental health . labour has a funded plan to ensure that every young person will have access to a specialist mental health professional at secondary school , and a plan for mental health hubs in every community . while we await the next labour government , this government must urgently set out how they will get down the waiting lists for child and adolescent mental health services , and deliver support to the children and young people who need it most . we also welcome the inclusion of content on sexual harassment and sexual violence . yesterday , i joined the leader of redbridge council and teachers to hear about the innovative step in programme that they are delivering in schools to tackle sexist harassment and misogyny . it was really inspiring to see the students so confidently addressing the issues with their peers and changing attitudes . i hope that , as part of the review , the government will look at some of the fantastic resources local authorities have developed while waiting for the government to act . we will now need to look at the exact detail of the draft guidance , as will schools . it is really important that stakeholders from across education are able to feed back their views on this , and i hope the government will reflect on them when finalising this guidance , and listen to the voices of schools , parents and young people in doing so . i would like to address the hon . lady ’s points ; i think i made a note of all of them . first , on this being long in the making , i just want us all to be aware of the timeline . this guidance was issued in 2019 , and it was made statutory in 2020 . ofsted conducted some work to see how it was bedding in , which gave us some feedback and comment about how more clarity was needed . that was in the second half of 2021 . obviously , we have taken leadership on this issue — leadership on which i think labour - run wales could take a leaf out of our book — and worked with a broad range of organisations . i have mentioned the expert panel , but we have worked with 86 other organisations as well . of course , this step is out for consultation , so we do expect that everybody who has a view — parents , teachers , local authorities and everybody — will be able to fully engage with the consultation . on the question about when an urgent issue comes up , or a child wants to ask questions or deal with something specific that they have seen or that has occurred to them , we of course expect that children can always ask questions . we build safe and trusting environments in schools , and there is a difference between a pupil asking a teacher a question or trying to discuss something with a teacher and a teacher standing up in front of a whole class and teaching on a particular subject . on the question about knowing about transgender — that gender reassignment exists , a law provides for it , it is a protected characteristic and it is something adults can do when they are older — and understanding those facts , we have of course made it clear that that is the case . on mental health support teams , the labour party seems to have missed what we have been doing on mental health . in every school in our country , we have given a grant to train a mental health support leader , and most of that work has been done . our schools have been engaged on that for a long time , and 4.2 million pupils , up from 3.4 million pupils last year , now have access to the mental health support teams that we are rolling out in all of our schools . that is rather different from the labour policy in that we do not have to completely raid any other sector such as support for special educational needs and disabilities or private schools to do that . we are also doing that for primary and secondary , because we think that is very important . the hon . lady mentioned materials , and i just want to update the house that oak materials will be available in rshe in the autumn . i call the father of the house . i thank the secretary of state for putting forward proposals that children need and that teachers , parents and school leaders have wanted . it seems to me that a lot of people are now saying , “ of course , what she ’s doing is right ” , and a year or two ago they were not saying that . i would just say in passing that some people who have been providing sex education lessons and gender lessons in primary schools boast that they have presented to 100,000 children and trained over 4,000 staff , and i think that kind of infiltration has to end . can i also say to the secretary of state that i hope her permanent secretary and others are listening to their seens — sex equality and equity networks — when they raise , or try to raise , the point with their departments that when departments ask questions about gender , they should be asking questions about sex ? i thank the father of the house , who , as usual , shows true leadership in this area , as in many others . he is absolutely right that there are examples of organisations with material on their websites that we think is inappropriate , because it is teaching contested views as facts , boasting about how many schools they have worked with . some organisations — i will not name them — have been teaching children about gender , gender expression , gender roles and different kinds of gender identities , and they claim to have worked with over 500 schools . there are many examples of that . that is why we had to show leadership on this . this is important : we have showed leadership in the area of gender questioning , and we have been clear about biological sex and how to teach that in schools . in labour - run wales , i believe they have removed all reference to “ man ” and “ woman ” in the curriculum , and they recommend that sex is not just about male or female . i want to look into whether those reports are true , but i would be happy to support the welsh cabinet secretary for education with that , because it needs to be taken seriously . people have very much changed their views on this issue . the children ’s commissioner has found that exposure to pornography is affecting children as young as eight — i am sure none of us would want that to be the case , but we have to deal with the world as it is , not as we might wish it to be . how will the secretary of state support schools to manage pupils ’ reactions to what they are seeing online — we know they are being exposed to things online that we wish they were not seeing — if those issues can not be addressed in rshe ? part of leadership and showing leadership is also dealing with those things we are not happy with . we are not happy that young children are having access to porn , which is why other measures are also being put in place through the department for science , innovation and technology . of course , it is always possible that children get access to things that they should not see , and they might raise questions as a result of that . usually , parents are the first educators of their children . parents would be the first people to get that question , and they would certainly expect to help their child through those things . as i said , if a child raises a question with a teacher , the teacher will deal with that , but that is different from teaching and showing anything that is sexually explicit in a classroom . we want to ensure that children are not exposed to such things in the first place , because this is something that has changed , and we must show leadership to address that . in answer to a question on “ legal duties on political impartiality do not supersede schools ’ other statutory requirements . schools should take a reasonable and proportionate approach to ensuring political impartiality , alongside their other responsibilities . ” i do not know how you would read that , mr deputy speaker , but i read it as an attempt to undermine the firm guidance given in statute law that partisan political views must not be promoted in school . i hope the secretary of state will look into that matter . i am grateful to my right hon . friend for raising that point . political impartiality is important , and the guidance he read out is meant to cover some commonsense exceptions . for example , some people would argue against democracy , and we do not want to give them a platform ; some people would argue for racism , and we do not want to give them a platform , and so on . those are the sorts of exceptions and contentions , and i will ensure that we look at the guidance to see that it is clearly understood by everybody . it is important to be clear . this issue has developed and grown , and our understanding of this area has grown over time . that is what the guidance is meant to do ; it is not to undermine political impartiality or the rule of law . in reviewing the 2019 guidance , does the secretary of state share my concern that not enough is being done on child safeguarding when it comes to child sexual exploitation , and in particular awareness raising , so that children and parents understand the warning signs ? across many towns a play called “ somebody ’s sister , somebody ’s daughter ” was rolled out to secondary - school age children , and that led to 150 disclosures of concern by children about family members or other pupils at the school , where they had seen those patterns of grooming potentially at play . does the secretary of state accept that however we want the world to be , 43 % of year 3 children — seven and eight - year - olds — have access to a smartphone ? if we do not teach these things in schools , they will find out information through other routes , and that will not be at all helpful for the safeguarding of children . another approach is obviously looking at access to smartphones at a very young age . on the point raised by the hon . gentleman , the most appropriate guidance is “ keeping children safe in education ” , which is a substantial piece of guidance and used regularly by schools . it is also regularly reviewed . of course there is a live discussion about our concerns regarding children having access to harmful content through mobile phones at a young age . we will continue to consider that , and that is why i took a step to also ban the use of smartphones in schools . the poet john betjeman said : “ childhood is measured out by sounds and smells and sights , before the dark hour of reason grows . ” darkness falls when very young children are forced to know too much , too early , and their innocence is stolen . in warmly welcoming the government ’s approach , will the secretary of state look again at those third - party organisations that are often invited into schools , sometimes witlessly , sometimes carelessly ? for they steal children ’s innocence , often in the name of diversity and inclusion , and in so doing , promote , promulgate and perpetuate every kind of horror . not only will i now be able to look at the materials , but so will parents , and so will ofsted when it reviews what is happening in schools against the guidance we have issued . transparency is important . obviously we should ensure that materials are appropriate and the guidance is there as well , but i believe that transparency will act as a great guide to ensure the right materials are in our schools . the secretary of state and i grew up in the same part of the world , a few hundred yards away from each other , albeit at different times . in my time , there was no way in which children could discuss these issues with their parents , who did not feel that it was at all appropriate . they were certainly never discussed in my school , just as i am sure that in the secretary of state ’s later time they were not discussed . the most i can remember is being shown a second world war film by a pe teacher about sexually transmitted diseases , which frankly terrified me . i am sure the secretary of state will agree that it is time that teachers got the guidance they need so that they can have sensible conversations with young people and — for that matter — parents as well . does she agree that we need to have this conversation respectfully , and create not dividing lines but common ground ? in that respect , will she urge some of her government colleagues to stop using the issue to create dividing lines ? let me reassure the right hon . gentleman . although we were a couple of years apart in knowsley , sex education did not change an awful lot . we had two lessons — one where girls and boys were apart , and one where they were together , where we were shown a film about childbirth . i think part of the class collapsed at that point , and a couple fainted , and that was it . times have moved on a lot . even education in knowsley has moved on a lot . i am delighted that we now have some good schools . indeed , 90 % of our schools are now good or outstanding , and that includes knowsley , which i am sure the right hon . gentleman and i are delighted about . it is important to show leadership on these issues , but it is also important to do so respectfully . that is something i have always sought to do , to answer and respond to a problem , and these concerns have been raised by parents and by teachers , requesting more clarity . i have tried to respond to that with the gender questioning guidance , and with the guidance under discussion . it is important that we respectfully discuss these matters . today is a very good day . from what i have read and from what i have heard the secretary of state say at the dispatch box , this guidance is what we have been waiting for . i thank the prime minister , the secretary of state and the minister for schools , my right hon . friend it is a very good day . i will be studying the guidance over the weekend , and i hope we can have further meetings about it over the coming weeks . parents do not want their children being taught by stonewall and brook . they do not want them teaching an ideology not based in anything . children need teaching the facts by all accounts , but they have to be facts of truth — that is where we need to be . age appropriateness is also extremely important , and i welcome that measure , too . children are children , and they should be kept as children as long as possible . it is a precious time that we all wish we could go back to . we do not want to be putting our children into adulthood far too soon . i welcome this guidance . i have three issues that i would like to raise quickly , if that is okay . there is literature within the school system that we need to ensure is removed . there is an awful lot , and one of the biggest problems we have had is the denial of that literature being in schools . it is in these schools , it is online , it is in paper , it is all over the place and it needs to come out . [ interruption . ] very quickly , we need to enforce this guidance , once it is done , because we have schools that still do not want to enforce it . finally , i still believe we need a public inquiry into how we got to this point and how we put 9,000 children on a damaging health path . we need to address that . the guidance is very good news ; i welcome it . i thank all members of the house who have discussed this matter respectfully , as well as contributing to and developing our understanding of what is going on in schools . on what is there in schools — i welcome my hon . friend ’s welcoming of this guidance — materials will now have to be shown to parents , no ifs , no buts , and we have made that crystal clear . the materials will need to be in line with the guidance . on enforcement , ofsted will , as part of what it usually does , go round and look at schools . it will also look at the guidance and what is being taught against it , so there is an enforcement process , too . it has not been easy to put this guidance together , and i thank all the members of the teams and members of the house who have helped us in that . i welcome the secretary of state ’s statement today , although i fear it is a bit overdue . will she concede that this debacle originated at least in part from the world health organisation ’s “ international technical guidance on sexuality education ” ? it is happening across the world , not just in this country , and that has led to a deeply damaging situation , where unscientific gender ideology has been pushed to our children in our schools . will she explain to the house how many children she believes have been exposed to this abuse ? what steps will she take to correct the mistakes that have already been made ? what assurance is there for parents that nothing like this can ever happen again and that it is being stopped today ? i take responsibility for england , and i welcome the hon . gentleman ’s welcoming of the guidance . i think we have shown leadership . we issued gender questioning guidance in december last year . we have updated the relationships , sex and health education guidance . within the united kingdom , there have been different views on this , and i reiterate my offer to wales and scotland , if they want to work with us , because the evidence has been emerging on this . i can only show leadership in the areas for which i am responsible . i welcome this guidance . it goes further than i thought , and it is unambiguous . it is not about creating dividing lines . i was quite late to this debate , until i realised it was an actual issue . i came across evidence of some worrying practices that were going on , and then i became involved in the issue . it is so important that the statutory guidance has teeth . even after this unambiguous guidance , if a school repeatedly breaches it , what mechanism is in place to hold that school to account ? on transparency , parents need to know what their children are being taught . if there are examples of schools being evasive , even after this guidance , what powers are in parents ’ hands to ensure that they can find out the facts ? the guidance is very clear . it is unusual to have guidance that is largely aimed at schools , but that has some parts for parents , too . we will put more communication for parents on the education hub so that they know what their rights are as a result of this guidance . when taking these positions , we can always think , “ what does the counterfactual look like ? ” it would be ridiculous to suggest that parents should not see the materials that their children are being taught from in schools . on enforcement , as i have mentioned , the guidance will become part of the usual school enforcement . ofsted will look at this guidance and at what is happening in schools , and use that as part of its inspections . seven years ago , before i came to this house , i spent 20 years teaching , some of the time in the north - west of england and some of it in wales . i knew , as a modern foreign languages teacher , that relationships and sex education was something that i had to deliver . the majority of teachers who have to deliver rse are not trained , and that still concerns me . i saw at first hand how lobby groups have easily been able to permeate this area in england and wales . while the guidance is welcome , it is very late . i appreciate the comments that the secretary of state has made about the devolved nations . that shows why it is important that we take politics out of this debate . we must present facts , and we must work together . will she share the expert panel ’s findings with the new education minister in wales and have a grown - up conversation ? let us take the politics out of this , because these are people ’s lives . absolutely . i hope the hon . lady will have seen that that is just not my style . i try to see problems and fix them in a reasonable and respectful way . quality materials are important . the hon . lady may have had that training , but not every teacher will have . the quality of materials is vital , and it is clear , as we have heard from others , that there have been some poor - quality materials and some materials that were spouting nonsense , let us be honest . that is why we will be producing our own materials , which the oak national academy will produce in the autumn . i would very much welcome a meeting with the education minister in wales , who as the hon . lady says is new and may not yet have looked at this matter in detail . to remove references to “ man ” and “ woman ” in the curriculum sounds ridiculous , and recommending teaching that sex is not just about male or female sounds ridiculous . some of those materials may have made their way into the curriculum , and i would welcome the opportunity to work with any of the devolved nations to get those materials out of our schools . that the statement has been so necessary today is a measure of the fact that some members of the teaching profession have taken leave of their senses . in that light , will the secretary of state consider to what extent the remedy is guidance or statutory requirement ? it is statutory guidance . it will also be transparent , as the materials will now be available to parents . it is not only statutory guidance , but this area will be under the scrutiny of every parent in the school . it is clear that we need to support our teachers and headteachers to ensure that they get this right . the vast majority will be getting it right , but it is an area that not everybody is specifically trained to teach , so it is important that we provide the materials and the guidance and make sure that ofsted enforces it . in 2023 , more than 400 young people were diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection every day . earlier this year , the women and equalities committee found “ compelling evidence that relationships and sex education … in schools is inadequate , including in relation to contraception and … stis ” . the children ’s commissioner has similarly attributed that shocking increase to the fact that we are not teaching our kids what they need to hear . will the secretary of state explain to the house how she thinks the new guidance , which seems to suggest that stis will not be taught about before year 9 — age 13 or 14 — will address those shocking rates ? the new guidance will be supplemented with materials that will be available from oak national academy , which we will ensure address any of the concerns raised . i look forward to working with the children ’s commissioner and others to make sure of that . i welcome the focus on tackling misogyny online and the influencers who peddle it , but i worry that year 5 will be a little too late to stop that influence taking hold . i want to ask the secretary of state about providing positive male role models for young boys , which is a really important part of this . will she address that in the consultation ? yes . indeed , many members of this house are positive male role models — there are many positive male role models — and we want to ensure that we celebrate and support positive male role models , not misogynistic online influencers . we need to teach children about the dangers of those people and ensure that their influence is countered by people who are real role models for children . i commend the secretary of state for her statement and the wisdom she has shown . the democratic unionist party welcomes the guidance issued to let kids be kids and to prevent sexualised content from being taught to under - nines . indeed , the government ’s rationale is similar to that which i gave in the chamber when i asked the secretary of state for northern ireland not to change the rse regime for northern ireland . will the secretary of state speak to her cabinet colleagues to ensure that the innocence of our children is protected in all regions of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland and that parents who are genuinely seeking to safeguard their children are afforded respect in terms of the classroom syllabus and have their rights to reasonably held views protected ? i thank my hon . friend for his comments . of course , what makes this subject difficult is the need to tread that fine line carefully — letting kids be kids while making sure that they are equipped in a world that is increasingly more complex than the world that we grew up in . we have sought very much to ensure that we get that balance right . i thank the secretary of state and opposition front benchers for their attendance . [ relevant document : oral evidence taken before the work and pensions committee on i beg to move , that this house notes the findings of the parliamentary and health service ombudsman report on women ’s state pension age ; and calls on the government to deliver prompt compensation to women born in the 1950s who had their state pension age raised . i am delighted to have secured today ’s debate on this very important issue . the motion urges the uk government to deliver prompt compensation to women born in the 1950s who had their state pension age raised , following the report from the parliamentary and health service ombudsman on the department of work and pensions ’ communication of changes to the state pension age for women . i extend my thanks to the backbench business committee for granting the debate . i lament the fact that it will not be possible to press the motion to a vote , as tellers from both sides of the argument would be required for such a vote to be held . although i am disappointed that there will be no vote , there is nothing at all to prevent the government from bringing forward such a vote in government time . indeed , the parliamentary and health service ombudsman has invited the house to express a view by laying its report before parliament , so that clearly needs to happen . will the hon . lady address the prejudice touched on at the work and pensions committee last week , namely that there has been an element of contributory negligence , in that the change was not a state secret — it was advertised and covered in the newspapers — and that some women who were approaching retirement or early retirement did not take proper notice ? will she knock that on the head ? if the right hon . gentleman reads the parliamentary and health service ombudsman ’s report , he will see that it makes it very clear that action was not taken to inform women in the appropriate way that one would expect and , indeed , that the dwp was negligent in that regard . my hon . friend has started off powerfully , as i knew she would , knowing what a huge advocate she is for the waspi women — women against state pension inequality . my hon . friend makes an excellent point . we know , do we not , that many impacted women found out at the last possible moment that their retirement age had been raised because they had not been given due notice to make plans in the way we would all expect ? the dwp has been found to be negligent . i will say more about that in a moment . the issue before us goes to the heart of our sense of justice and fairness and the social contract that the government of the day have with their citizens . a whole generation of women had their pension age raised without the notice that they were entitled to expect , robbing them not just of tens of thousands of pounds in pension payments but of their retirement plans , of financial peace of mind and of the contract they believed that they had with the society in which they worked hard , paid their dues and fulfilled their responsibilities . they thought that they could enjoy some sort of retirement in later life — after all , they had earned it , had they not ? the social contract is an agreement that we all think we should be able to rely on , but when the government tear at the edges of that contract or rip it through as though it never existed , what retirement can any of us — or should any of us — count on ? i have met a range of women in the women against state pension inequality campaign over a number of years . of particular note are the ayrshire waspi group and the cunninghame waspi group , who represent waspi women in my constituency of north ayrshire and arran and , indeed , waspi women across ayrshire . all women in the waspi movement have distinguished themselves by their effective campaigning against the gross injustice that has been perpetrated against them , in the face of extreme provocation by a government who have been tone deaf to their pleas for justice . i have been inspired by those women ’s dignity , their resilience in the face of great financial hardship and their persistence , and by the compelling justice of their case . i know many of the women involved ; i know their stories . i note the hugely helpful insight provided by writer dee wild kearney , the author of “ not going away ! ” , who joins us in the gallery . dee ’s book , which is available in all good bookshops , outlines the struggles of some of the women involved in the campaign . i pay tribute to her work to disseminate this injustice to an even wider audience . i welcome all the waspi women in the public gallery , some of whom have travelled a considerable distance to be here today . they are entitled to have their voices heard and their case answered . when a whole generation of women find themselves victim to injustice on such a grand and heartbreaking scale , those mps who champion their cause feel the weight of their frustrations , the weight of their hardships and their profound sense of having been screwed over . in turn , as mps we feel our own frustration when faced with an intransigent government who refuse to listen and appear wilfully blind to the facts . one of my constituents , who i have worked with since 2017 , was one of the ombudsman ’s six test cases . in fact , i am unable to make a speech today because i am meeting the ombudsman on behalf of my constituent at 2 pm . my hon . friend is frustrated with the government ’s lack of action so far , but is she as disappointed and angry as i am about the labour party ’s refusal to back the waspi women , despite promising tens of billions in compensation at the last election ? order . before the hon . lady proceeds , i note that 21 members wish to participate in the debate . i understand that this is an important subject and i have no desire whatsoever to curtail either the debate or the right of hon . members to intervene — i appreciate only too well the urgency of getting one ’s point on the record — but if those on the front bench , or indeed any other hon . member , give way too many times , not all will be called to speak . it is important that every hon . member who wishes to speak can do so , and i therefore hope that we can resist the temptation to intervene whenever not necessary . thank you , mr deputy speaker , and i take on board your comments . none of the uk government ’s intransigence has distracted from the dignity with which with the campaigners have conducted themselves over the long years that this swindle — and it is a swindle — has been carried out . my hon . friend “ negatively affected complainants ’ sense of personal autonomy and control over their finances . ” the report found : “ the dwp did not adequately investigate and respond to complaints ” . in a damning condemnation , it highlighted that , despite all of that , the dwp “ will not take steps to put things right ” and that its refusal to do so was unacceptable . it concluded : “ parliament needs now to act swiftly , and make sure a compensation scheme is established . we think this will provide women with the quickest route to remedy . ” this is surely one of the gravest injustices of our time , alongside the contaminated blood scandal and the horizon scandal . it is another example of citizens having things done to them , which by every measure is wrong and unjust . i commend my hon . friend for securing today ’s debate . on behalf of the midlothian waspi women , i thank her for all her work , and all members who have contributed to making this debate happen . does she agree that the fact that these injustices happen over and over again shows how out of touch the government in this place have become ? one would be forgiven for thinking of a real disconnect between those we seek to serve and those who serve . when that disconnect repeatedly happens , and this systematic failure perpetrates such injustice , it is a very bad day for democracy . the difference between this case and the contaminated blood and horizon scandals — both were awful injustices — is that the government at least appear to wish to take action on those scandals , albeit very slowly . they appear to wish to make moves to address those injustices . in this case , of changing the state pension age with little or no notice , with the devastating consequences that it has brought , the parliamentary and health service ombudsman has been moved to say : “ it is extremely rare that an organisation we investigate does not accept and act on our recommendations . ” it added that it has “ no legal powers ” to enforce compliance . a failure to comply with the ombudsman ’s recommendations represents a constitutional gap in protecting the rights of citizens who have been failed by a public body , and in ensuring access to justice . by laying this report , the phso has asked parliament to intervene , to agree a mechanism for remedy and to hold the government to account for its delivery . here we are . we are holding the government to account , while they and the incoming labour government enjoy a cosy “ do nothing ” consensus , sacrificing waspi women on the bonfire of austerity that they have built together in a deliberate and conscious way . for the parliamentary and health service ombudsman to issue such a statement is unprecedented , but it illustrates how shocking it is that this government , supported by the loyal opposition — loyal in ways we could only imagine — appear to be trying to ignore , obfuscate and gaslight their way out of this crisis , and it is a crisis for the women impacted . neither labour nor the tories in government have even accepted the principle of financial redress for waspi women . how do i know that ? because when the secretary of state made a statement shortly after the long - awaited publication of this report , he made no mention of redress or compensation , but instead listed how great it currently is to be a pensioner in the united kingdom because of the sheer munificence of the uk government . the shadow secretary of state ’s response to that statement studiously avoided mentioning compensation as well , instead delivering a patronising yet supine eulogy on treating pensioners with dignity . empty words do not pay bills , and no one is fooled by that nonsense . perhaps we should not be too surprised , since labour has a track record of letting women down , particularly working - class women . after all , the labour administration in glasgow city council spent £ 2.5 million of taxpayers ’ money fighting equal pay claims by female council workers over 10 years . that shows beyond any reasonable doubt just how far labour was prepared to go to fight equal pay — an incredible waste of public money . it took an snp administration in glasgow council to ensure that legal action was stopped and the pay claims were settled . that was a priority of the incoming snp administration . we know that labour has a track record of denying justice to women , so we can not expect much from that quarter , and anybody who does will be disappointed . however , the waspi women i have spoken to feel particularly betrayed by labour mps and msps , who have spent the last umpteen years posing for photographs , smiling broadly alongside waspi campaigners and pledging what turned out to be empty words of support , only to abandon them at the very moment they were vindicated by the ombudsman . the same debate was held last week in the scottish parliament . incredibly , labour msps — who are not just members of the scottish parliament but members of the scottish branch office — abstained , as ordered by their high command bosses in london , on a motion that called for higher compensation to properly reflect the financial harm suffered by waspi women . that motion sounds pretty reasonable to me — it would to anybody . the sums mentioned in the ombudsman ’s report are simply too low . i think most people would agree with that . they must be considered in the context that the uk government have saved £ 181.4 billion purely by raising the state pension age of these women . so it is time to get real . the uk government could perhaps examine the private member ’s bill brought forward by my hon . friend the leader of the opposition has himself benefited from a special law passed in parliament : the pensions increase ( pension scheme for keir starmer qc ) regulations 2013 . it relates to when he was the director of public prosecutions in england , and his personal pension is protected . it is quite literally one law for him and another law for everybody else , especially if you are a waspi woman and even more so if you are a working - class woman . it does not escape anyone ’s notice that the leader of the opposition is now very silent on the injustice suffered by waspi women and supports less generous pensions for everyone else . what a brass neck . what shameful hypocrisy . maybe he is just so cocksure of a thumping labour majority at the next election that he thinks waspi women are expendable . who knows ? meanwhile , around 280,000 waspi women who have been impacted have died since the start of the waspi campaign . around 6,000 have died since the publication of the ombudsman report . why is there no urgency to address this injustice ? no wonder waspi women ’s impatience and sense of injustice is fast turning into outright fury . who could blame them ? because of the evasions and mis - directions used in previous debates , i wish to say to the minister that this is not a debate about returning the retirement age back to 60 ; this is not a debate about the triple lock ; and this is not a debate about anything except the injustice suffered by women born in the 1950s who have been vindicated by the parliamentary and health service ombudsman . i thank the hon . lady for giving way . i think all of us in this chamber have spoken to our waspi women . i have barbara and lynn from hartlepool here today . they informed me earlier that every 13 minutes a 1950s woman dies . that 280,000 is growing as we speak . i thank the hon . lady for that point . all she does is emphasise how desperately urgent this matter is . every 13 minutes a waspi woman dies , so how many will die while we are having this debate ? another half dozen ? who knows ? it may be more than that . there are no more hiding places . it is time for swift compensation to be delivered to these women who have already endured far too much hardship and distress . the redress that they are accorded must reflect that suffering and there must be no barriers to accessing it for any of the women affected . no one can any longer deny the rightness of their compelling case . it is time to pay up . it is time to deliver . as the minister and the labour leadership must surely know by now , these women are not going away . it is my hope that when the minister gets to his feet he will have something meaningful to say to the house today , and to all the waspi women who have already waited too long for justice . perhaps he can at least set out some kind of timeframe for when the government will bring forward redress proposals for those impacted . it is a travesty to drag this injustice out one moment longer . i hope the minister agrees and does the right thing by this generation of women , or will these women continue to suffer while his government pontificate ? i hope not , but i say today to the minister , and i say today to the waspi women who are listening both at home and in the public gallery that the snp unequivocally stands with you . we will not abandon you , as others have done . it is a privilege to speak in the debate . when my constituents who have made a complaint come to see me , we quite often get to a stage at which i recommend the ombudsman to them . i regularly say to them , “ have faith : ombudsmen quite often find in favour of the complainant . ” ombudsmen are there for a purpose . we can not merely support the institution of the ombudsman when it makes a convenient finding for the government of the day . we have to accept its decisions if we are to have an ombudsman . we all know that trust in politics , politicians and mps is at something of a low point at the moment , no matter what party we are in . i think that is very unfair , because most people in this house , of all parties , are decent people doing their best for their constituents and working very hard , so that reduction in trust really worries me . the response of the government and parliament to the ombudsman ’s report is really important , because it touches on the issue of trust in our institutions , which have been through a very difficult time . i warmly welcome the thrust of my hon . friend ’s argument . for the benefit of the record , i draw his attention and that of the house to paragraph 459 of the report , which states : “ for most sample complainants we consider the primary injustice is that they were denied opportunities to make informed decisions about some things , and to do some things differently , because of maladministration in dwp ’s communication about state pension age . that is a material injustice . ” i am grateful to my right hon . friend . what he says is accurate . he quotes from the report ; it was in july 2021 that the ombudsman found maladministration . in the report on “ in 2005 it failed to take adequate account of the need for targeted and individually tailored information . in 2006 , dwp proposed writing directly to women individually to let them know their state pension age had changed , but it then failed to act promptly . we found that if dwp had made a reasonable decision about next steps in 2005 , and then acted promptly , it would have begun writing to affected women by december 2006 . ” my right hon . friend and other members will have seen that in the back of the report , there is a table showing what should have happened when . i , too , have constituents who wrote to me to say that they were very close to the age of 60 at the time . some had worked all their working life , since the age of 15 or so . they had made all their plans on the basis that they could get their pension at 60 , and they literally found out about the change from colleagues in the workplace , sometimes very shortly before they thought they were due to retire . will the hon . gentleman give way ? i will , briefly , but it will probably be the last intervention , as i take heed of what mr deputy speaker said . i thank the hon . gentleman for giving way . the point he makes rings true for me . the very first constituent who came to me with a problem when i was elected seven years ago was a waspi woman . she was less than two years away from retirement when she learned by accident of the change . seven years on , she is no better off ; in a lot of ways , she is much worse off . a lot of those who are not waspi women now wonder if they know the truth about when they will get their pension . does he agree that although this issue is fundamentally about the waspi women , it is about trust , and women having trust in this institution ? i agree . the issue of trust is really important , one that this house should not take lightly . in my south west bedfordshire constituency , it is estimated that there are 6,000 women in this situation . the cost of their compensation , at level 4 , as recommended by the ombudsman , would be £ 6 million at the lower level , and at the upper level £ 17.7 million . if we extrapolate from that to the uk , i think the sum is £ 3.9 billion at the lower end and £ 11.5 billion at the upper end . we must be honest ; i believe in honesty in politics . these are large sums — very large , when we add the amount that we will have to pay the postmasters and postmistresses , for whom we are also all campaigning , and the sums for the victims of the infected blood scandal , for whom most of us are also campaigning ; and then there are other campaigns , such as the one relating to equitable life . will the hon . gentleman give way ? i will because it is the hon . lady , but this must be the last intervention . the hon . gentleman talked about the way in which the bill for all these compensation schemes is mounting . does that not merely underline the importance of competent government ? of course it is best if governments get these things right , but government is difficult , and governments of all parties will make mistakes because they are human . however , i am making a different point on honesty about the overall government finances . when i was taught economics , a long time ago , i was made aware of the notion of opportunity cost . we can only spend the same pound once , and if we are to spend billions on one thing , we must be honest about the other things on which we can not spend money — things that the waspi women may very much want — or the services we will have to cut , or the taxes we will have to raise . i have tried to find out from the library how the treasury reserves work , and how we can account nationally for a contingency fund to deal with issues such as this . we just need a bit of honesty here , as a parliament . if we are to do the right thing by the waspi women — as i believe we should ; i want us to , and we should do the same for those other groups — we need to consider a fund in the treasury reserves that is dedicated to contingencies , although it might not be large enough to pay out on every cause in the way we would like ; perhaps the nation would not be able to afford that . while i absolutely back the justice of the cause of the waspi women , and while i think we should honour what the ombudsman said , or at least move towards doing that , we need to be honest about the nation ’s finances and the other calls on the exchequer . let me finish where i began — i will be brief , heeding mr deputy speaker ’s injunction . this comes back to the question of trust . we agree with the umpire not just when we are in favour of the umpire ’s decision . either we have an ombudsman or we do not , and while the ombudsman ’s finding may be uncomfortable or inconvenient , it is neverthe- less the finding , and we should do the right thing . i thank the backbench business committee for giving us the opportunity for this debate , and i thank i draw the house ’s attention to the evidence that my committee , the work and pensions committee , took on the ombudsman opened an investigation of all this in 2018 , six years ago . after receiving more than 600 cases , it stopped accepting new ones and selected six sample cases to investigate , one or two of which have been referred to today . the investigation was split into stages . the first report , published in july 2021 , found maladministration in the way in which the dwp had communicated the changes to affected women . a further report , published in march this year , concluded that this had meant that “ some women had lost opportunities to make informed decisions about their finances ” , which had “ diminished their sense of personal autonomy and financial control ” and “ caused unnecessary stress and anxiety ” and “ unnecessary confusion ” . let me say at the outset that the right hon . gentleman was a distinguished minister , well respected across the house in his various government jobs . is communication not the nub of this ? of course the decision itself is a matter for a debate on pension entitlement , but there is the entirely separate issue of how the decision was communicated , and the injustice lies in that failure to communicate . when we change people ’s circumstances with notice and they have time to deal with it , cope with it , make alternative arrangements , that is one thing ; but when we do not give them adequate notice because of their age , that is quite another . disraeli , i think , said “ justice is truth in action ” , and that is the truth of the matter . the right hon . gentleman has echoed a number of the points that the ombudsman has drawn to our attention , but i think we should be clear about the fact that a great many people did know about this change . the passage of the legislation was widely reported at the time , nearly 30 years ago , and i vividly recall that in the first of my two stints as pensions minister , i spent a fair chunk of most days signing replies to mps who had written on behalf of constituents who were unhappy about the impending change , or were calling on the then fairly new government to reverse it . the replies that i signed were robust , and made it clear that the decision would not be reversed . the decision was quite well known , and — however , the ombudsman has established and made clear in the report that the department found out , at around the second time i was pensions minister , that only 40 % of women had known about the forthcoming pension age change . forty per cent . is a large number , but 60 % — the proportion who did not know about it — is even larger . the department found that out as a result of research done in 2003 - 04 , but did nothing about it until 2009 . that is the maladministration that the ombudsman has identified . we do not know why nothing was done — well , i certainly do not — because the ombudsman has not told us , but it can not be credibly argued that this was not maladministration . when a department discovers information and then does nothing , there is clearly a problem . i am grateful to my right hon . friend for describing his experiences in connection with this matter . we have a clear finding of maladministration , but government acceptance of that does not automatically follow , so we are having a debate today about whether we accept the findings when , given the timescale , we ought surely to be thinking more about how we deal with issues relating to who is eligible and who is not . i agree , and i will come to that point when i talk about the select committee ’s discussions last week . it is worth adding that the problems caused by that maladministration were exacerbated by the decision in 2011 to increase the state pension age not to 65 , as provided by legislation in 1995 , but to 66 , with very little notice given of that change . the ombudsman said that had it reported directly to the dwp , it would have recommended that the department apologise for the maladministration and take steps to put things right . as we all now know , the ombudsman did not report directly to the department because of concern that no remedy would be forthcoming . the interim ombudsman , rebecca hilsenrath , told the committee last week that her office had been “ given repeatedly to understand that the department did not accept our findings . ” perhaps , when he winds up the debate , the minister can tell us whether the department now recognises that there was maladministration in this case . in laying its report before parliament in march , the ombudsman asked us in the house to “ identify an appropriate mechanism ” for providing a remedy . it set out its thinking , namely that the dwp should first acknowledge the maladministration and apologise ; secondly , pay financial compensation to the six sample complainants at level 4 of the severity of injustice scale ; and , thirdly , identify a remedy for others who had suffered injustice because of the maladministration . as we have heard , the ombudsman estimated that this would involve a sum of between £ 3.5 billion and £ 10.5 billion . we need to find a resolution to this issue , and to find it quite quickly , because it has dragged on for a very long time . angela madden , the chair of the waspi campaign , told the work and pensions committee last week that a woman from the affected cohort dies every 13 minutes , which is a powerful point to make . i want to ask the right hon . member about resolution . given the maladministration and the points made by the ombudsman , the conclusion needs to happen through political choice . that political choice is between either the government sitting there or a government who might replace them at some point this year . surely the waspi women in my constituency of west dunbartonshire , and those in everyone ’s constituencies , need political agreement — not obfuscation or an abdication responsibility , but a clear political choice . i agree . the government have said that they will respond without “ undue delay ” , and that they are considering the report in detail . can the minister tell the house this afternoon whether the government will bring forward proposals for remedy , as the work and pensions committee believes that they should , before the summer recess ? we should set a clear timetable . we need a scheme that is easy to administer . the ombudsman said that , in principle , redress should reflect the impact on each individual , but it recognised that the need to avoid delay , and the large numbers involved , “ may indicate the need for a more standardised approach ” . jane cowley , the waspi campaign manager , told the work and pensions committee that given the need for action “ within weeks rather than years ” , the scheme should be based on three principles : speed , simplicity and sensitivity . the evidence that has been gathered points to a rules - based approach to working out the compensation that should be paid . i have read the evidence given to the right hon . member ’s committee , which was taken in april this year . if the government agreed that they had to accept responsibility for this issue and to go forward with it , how quickly could we start to see the highly justified compensation being paid to these women ? i would hope quite quickly , and i will explain why . the payments involved would be adjusted within a range , based on the ombudsman ’s severity of injustice scale . it would depend on two variables : first , the extent of the change to the individual ’s state pension age — how much it increased by — and , secondly , the notice that the individual received . the less notice someone had of the change , and the bigger the change to their state pension age , the higher the payment they would receive . an arrangement like that would not be perfect , but it would be quite quick and relatively inexpensive to administer compared with a more bespoke system , because it would involve applying known data to a formula to work out the amount that was due . i ask the minister whether he accepts that , in principle , a rules - based system would be the best way forward . beyond that , it was suggested to the work and pensions committee that there should be some flexibility for individuals to make the case , after the standard payment has been calculated , that they experienced direct financial loss as a result of the maladministration , and that they should therefore be entitled to a higher level of compensation . flexibility would be needed , because although the ombudsman did not see direct financial loss in the six sample complaints that it looked at , it did not exclude the possibility that there could be in other cases . for example , angela madden , the chair of the waspi campaign , suggested to us that somebody whose divorce settlement was less than it would have been because it was based on the expectation that she would receive her state pension at the age of 60 , might well be entitled to a larger amount because of that particular development . the right hon . gentleman makes a very important point . looking at the experience of other compensation schemes — the one that comes to my mind is the icelandic trawlermen compensation scheme — it is clear that the longer we leave these things , and the longer the passage of time , the more difficult it gets to resolve them . does that not underline the need for speed here ? i agree that we need to get on and resolve this issue after a very long period . the ombudsman suggested a remedy based on level 4 of its severity of injustice scale , given the finding that individuals had experienced indirect financial loss . we on the work and pensions committee did not seek to question that view , and i do not intend to do so this afternoon . regardless of the level of remedy or the means by which remedy is delivered , it will need parliamentary time , financial resources , and the data and technical systems that are available only to the department for work and pensions . even if a back bencher brings forward a private member ’s bill , as there will be different views on the findings of the ombudsman ’s report . however , as the interim ombudsman told the work and pensions committee last week , she is appointed by parliament to carry out these investigations and is accountable to it through the public administration and constitutional affairs committee . i will read out what karl banister from the ombudsman ’s staff told the work and pensions committee last week . he said : “ we want everyone to comply with our recommendations , but it is implicit in the scheme that because we do n’t have enforcement powers , it may be , sometimes , that an organisation thinks it does n’t want to . then the partnership is that parliament , as our supervisor , will do something about that . ” that goes to the point made by “ i think what would damage the standing of the ombudsman is if parliament declined to do that . ” it is important for all of us that we see this through . we have asked the ombudsman to undertake this role , and it has done the job that we asked it to do . we now need to play our part in ensuring that this matter is resolved . time is not on our side , and the government have been aware of this issue for a while . the right hon . member is giving an incredibly well - informed speech on this matter . i have met angela madden and various waspi women in dudley , and it is clearly a highly complicated and difficult issue to resolve , especially if it is necessary for the government to look at appropriate and proportionate remedies , having first identified the women who have come to harm . does the right hon . member agree that whatever solution is come to , it is necessary to accelerate the work on this incredibly complicated issue at pace ? while the clock does not stop for anybody , it certainly seems to accelerate for those of us of a greater age . i agree that we need to get a move on . that is why the government should commit to bringing forward some proposals before the summer recess , so that we all know where we are heading . the government have all the information they need . it is a difficult and costly matter , but i hope they will be able to bring forward proposals in time for the house ’s summer recess . it is a great honour to follow it is no surprise that i want to speak in today ’s debate , as i represent the oldest cohort of constituents in the entire country . in north norfolk , there are somewhere in the region of 5,000 waspi women who have been impacted by this issue , and not a week goes by without my receiving correspondence from women who have been affected terribly . i will come to the report ’s findings in a moment , but i will first reflect on the real impact of this scandal and on what has happened to the women caught up in it . the problem with this place is that we often forget about the real people and the real suffering . we sometimes get very preoccupied with the political and financial problems in front of us and questioning why they happened in the first place , but that is somewhat secondary , because we must not forget about all the women who have really been affected . across the country , thousands of women in our constituencies are affected . the hon . gentleman is making an important point about finding a resolution . it has been over 1,000 days since the ombudsman found the government guilty of maladministration . we have heard the shocking figure that a waspi woman dies every 13 minutes , which means that over 100,000 affected women have passed away since the ombudsman ’s finding . i am sure the hon . gentleman will agree that we need to work together to ensure that the government get a move on in bringing forward compensation proposals before the summer recess . because people are passing away and time is of the essence . i totally agree with the hon . gentleman . it is now about speed , and i will come to that point later in my speech . waspi women have already suffered for years and years and , now this report has been published , we should learn from the other injustices we have seen , such as the post office scandal , that speed is of the essence . we need to come up with a remedy as quickly as possible . my hon . friend is making a very powerful speech about the impact on individuals , as well as the numbers . does he agree that this is about fairness , taking into account the individual facts of each case ? leigh lady maggie briley retired four years before she turned 60 to look after her parents with dementia . not getting her pension , as she fully expected , at 60 meant that she had to sell her home and take up a low - paid job to make ends meet , and of course she could not look after her parents , who suffered as well . does my hon . friend agree that this is about not just fast compensation but fair compensation , based on the individual circumstances of each case ? that is not necessarily just for maggie , but for the 5,220 waspi women in my constituency . my hon . friend is absolutely right . this is about individuals , and every single individual who has been impacted has a different life story to tell . it is very difficult for the government to come up with a redress scheme that covers every eventuality because , as my hon . friend says , individual circumstances affect everyone who has been impacted . all right , some ladies have coped . they might have had savings , earnings or private pensions , and in some cases they were lucky enough to have family who were able to help , but an awful lot of women had absolutely none of that . huge numbers have suffered through absolutely no fault of their own . as has been repeated many times , many waspi women have died in recent years . we can not imagine just how difficult it must have been for some of these women , who have had so little , to cope through the time delay they have suffered . it was not their fault . back home in north norfolk , like my hon . friend i am a new mp — not so new any more , i guess — and we see so many injustices . it is a privilege to try to fix them , whether it is infected blood , the loan charge , hillsborough or the post office , which is particularly pertinent to me . we in this place should learn how we can try to sort out some of these injustices . both ministers are excellent , decent , empathetic people . i have previously spoken to them about this issue , and i know they care deeply about it . as has already been said , we should be honest about today ’s debate . the public purse does not have billions of pounds of spare capacity at the moment , and the people of this country who are watching are intelligent . they can see that the financial scarring of the pandemic weighs very heavily on us . in this debate , we should be practical with our suggestions , and we need to get over that point . it has happened . there is a problem , and there is no point denying it . i hear the odd cursory comment from constituents who say , “ well , they should have known about it . it was advertised enough . ” that is not fair . the ombudsman ’s report makes that very clear . these women were failed , in many cases , by the state . the redress , the compensation mechanism , must be clear and fair . as we heard , there must be speed , sensitivity and simplicity . the waspi campaign ’s brief is very sensible in saying that the government should come forward with a two - pronged approach that delivers a higher level of compensation to those with the shortest notice of the longest delay to receiving their state pension . why is that fair ? because those are the women who are impacted the most . if they were impacted the most , they are the ones who have suffered the most , and they deserve that redress . but that is not enough not to think about everybody else . it is sensible to put together some eligibility criteria that enable all the other impacted cohorts to be able to make a claim for compensation . it is right that we come forward with that as quickly as possible . one thing i have learned in this place , not to be too facetious , is that things do not happen very quickly , but this is something that should be happening quickly . when the public mood moves , as we saw with the post office scandal , we know that we can move quickly . we have the report , and the waspi women have already suffered for an inordinate amount of time . i urge the government to come up with that remedy , and to get on with it quickly . i , too , thank the backbench business committee for enabling the debate to take place . i suppose that i should congratulate i will be brief . the case for righting this injustice is convincing . although the parliamentary and health service ombudsman ’s inquiry noted that , “ timely and accurate information was available about changes to the number of qualifying years needed for a full state pension as a result of the 2014 pensions act ” , it did find , “ maladministration in dwp ’s communication about the 1995 pensions act ” . in addition , the report found that , “ maladministration in dwp ’s complaint handling caused complainants unnecessary stress and anxiety and meant an opportunity to lessen their distress was lost . for some complainants , it also caused unnecessary worry and confusion . ” that is pretty clear about the extent of the maladministration . in the context of this debate , the ombudsman stated : “ given the scale of the impact of dwp ’s maladministration , and the urgent need for a remedy , we are taking the rare but necessary step of asking parliament to intervene . ” i stress the use of the word “ urgent ” , which i will return to and on which several hon . members have already commented . i will first say a few words about the women who have been affected by this wholly unfair and unacceptable matter . we need to remind ourselves that the women born in the 1950s did everything required of them to ensure that reliable arrangements were in place when they reached pensionable age . that is the crux of the matter . i strongly believe that we as members of this house have a responsibility to accept our duty to remedy the situation . to return to the ombudsman ’s emphasis on the word “ urgent ” , my fear is that we will not deal with the situation urgently . let me be clear : i do not believe that allowing the clock to run down to the forthcoming general election is an acceptable option . my fear was confirmed yesterday at prime minister ’s questions when , in response to my hon . friend “ following the ombudsman ’s multi - year investigation , it is imperative that we take the time to review the findings thoroughly . ”—[official report , the problem with that is the facts are already well known , and it certainly does not reflect the ombudsman ’s conclusion about the urgency of the issue . i will make a suggestion that i urge both front - bench spokespeople to adopt . i believe that we could do the right thing in this parliament if the government and opposition parties held talks , convened and chaired by mr speaker , with a view to putting a bill before the house as speedily as possible . i am mindful and supportive of the suggestion of my right hon . friend as other hon . members mentioned , every generation experiences injustices . in my time in the house , they have included the thalidomide victims , hillsborough , primodos , contaminated blood and , most recently , the horizon scandal . for me , they are all debts of honour that we have a duty to redeem . i suspect that a majority of members of the house would agree , so please let us have the opportunity to do so . rose — order . after the next speaker , i will impose a time limit of 10 minutes , which , as they say , is not a target but a maximum . if hon . members adhere to it , we will have time for the front - bench spokespeople and we will have the ability to accommodate every hon . member who seeks to speak . i call peter aldous . i congratulate in brief , the following issues arise from the report . first , the phso found that in 2005 , the department for work and pensions , “ failed to take adequate account of the need for targeted and individually tailored information ” to be shared with women affected by the changes to the state pension age . that amounted to maladministration and resulted in the six complainants whose cases were considered not being able to do things differently or make informed , mitigating decisions . the phso concluded that they should be compensated for that . secondly , the phso took the highly unusual step of laying its report before parliament , due to its concerns that the dwp would fail to provide a remedy . although the phso has put forward a suggestion as to what the compensation should be , it has asked parliament to intervene to agree a mechanism for remedy and to hold the government to account . thirdly , the phso points out that it is “ extremely rare ” for an organisation that it investigates not to accept and act on its recommendations . it makes the observation that a failure to comply with its recommendations represents a constitutional gap in protecting the rights of citizens who have been failed by a public body and in ensuring access to justice . my interest in the injustice arises from the fact that , for approximately eight years , as regular as clockwork , constituents have been highlighting to me the enormous challenges and hardship that they have faced and endured . for the past four years , i have had the privilege of co - chairing the all - party parliamentary group on state pension inequality for women with , first , it is important to thank the phso for its work and the duty that it has carried out . it has received criticism for the time that it has taken and for the narrow remit of considering six cases that some are concerned do not fully reflect the injustice that 1950s - born women as a whole have had to endure . however , it would have been very easy for the phso to have decided that this was not a case for it to investigate . instead , it has not shied away from the past . the investigation has taken a long time because it is complicated and there was a need to get it right . the phso has provided us with a snapshot . it is up to us — parliament , government and the dwp — to extrapolate and put right a problem that may well extend much more widely . to do that , the phso has provided some guidelines that we need to follow . parliament should take immediate steps to find a resolution for those who do not have time on their side . each case should be considered on its own merits . finite resources are not an excuse for failing to provide a fair remedy . if parliament chooses to do nothing , that will undermine the ombudsman . the department for work and pensions should respect what parliament recommends . there must be a commitment from government to take on board the phso ’s findings and to work collegiately with parliament in finding and then implementing a fair and just remedy . a wider issue that needs to be considered , perhaps in the first instance by the right hon . member for east ham and his committee , is the breakdown in communication and implementation of policy in the dwp , going back over 30 years . i accept that the department ’s remit is large , challenging and complicated , but the phso highlights repeated failures in the department ’s communication of state pension reforms . we must not let cause become more important that effect . as my hon . friend described , it is right that we look at why and how this happened , but what really matters is what happened , because what the waspi women need is action quickly . if we were to spend a great deal of time looking at the genesis of the issue , i am not sure that quick action would be delivered , so i endorse what the right hon . member for east ham said about establishing criteria that can be effected with reasonable speed . i thank my right hon . friend for that point , which he makes quite well . i am diverting slightly from the main cause and theme , but i think he and i are on the same page . as i said , i am concerned about repeated failures in the department ’s communications . only last saturday , a constituent highlighted to me how the introduction of the new state pension penalises those women born in 1951 and 1952 . the end frozen pensions campaign points out that 85 % of frozen pensioners did not know of the policy ’s existence prior to moving abroad . on that point , will my hon . friend give way ? very briefly , because this is a side issue . the report acknowledges that the dwp is now modernising its system so that people are informed , but does he agree that moving to a modernised system might pose a risk , specifically to pensioners who are digitally excluded , that something similar could happen again in future ? my hon . friend makes a good point . it is a side point to the main point , but nevertheless the phso has pinpointed that issue . these are debates for another day . i suspect the right hon . member for east ham and his committee need to look at these issues in more detail , but the phso has shone a spotlight on a wider problem . the aims of the appg that i co - chair with the hon . member for salford and eccles are threefold : first , to represent those women who have been treated unjustly by the short - notice changes to the state pension age , 280,000 of whom have died , according to waspi , since the start of the campaign ; secondly , to develop and promote policy solutions to support 1950s - born women and their families who do not have access to their pension and are facing mental and physical health consequences ; and thirdly , to feed the views and experiences of 1950s - born women into future policy decisions relating to state pensions and welfare . over the years , the appg has had regular evidence - gathering sessions with various representative groups , and we have considered policies and initiatives to best help and assist them . in january 2022 , the appg made its own submission to the phso about the level of compensation that should be provided . i give special thanks to the hon . member for denton and reddish for the work that he and his office did putting that together . based on the evidence presented to us from across the uk , we reached what , for us , was the logical conclusion that level 6 of the phso ’s compensation scale should apply . subsequently , we refined that recommendation by proposing that compensation should be provided in a bell curve , with those who received least notice of the longest postponement receiving the most compensation , and those who received longer notice of shorter increase receiving lesser sums . may i take the opportunity to thank my hon . friend for his key role in the appg ? i put on the record the dignified and well - informed views of local waspi co - ordinators in my part of the world , shelagh simmons and sal robinson . we heard an intervention suggesting each case should be judged on its individual circumstances . i can see the merit in that , but it would have a devastating effect on the speed with which we would come to conclusions . what balance does my hon . friend think should be struck on those two factors ? my sense is that there is a need to strike a balance , as the phso says . a way forward is beginning to emerge from the work of the appg and the select committee , and i will elaborate on that . since the phso published its report on last tuesday , the hon . member for salford and eccles and i appeared before the work and pensions committee — likewise , i am grateful to the right hon . member for east ham and his colleagues for the fair and full reception they provided . we are holding our own evidence sessions with the various representative groups ; the first three sessions took place on monday and there are more to follow . this is a complicated matter . while the appg is yet to reach a settled and final recommendation about the form a compensation mechanism should take , it is fair to say that ideas are fast evolving and are pointing in a direction . will the hon . gentleman advise the house , as well as waspi women in west dunbartonshire and across the uk , on whether one of those recommendations will be for a ministerial apology , on behalf of the department , for where we are now ? phso suggests an apology from the dwp should be encapsulated in what it comes up with as a way forward . the dwp ’s own guidelines include an apology as well . i will focus on the form of compensation redress , which is emerging in a little more detail . while the phso has suggested that compensation should be paid at level 4 on their scale , there is disquiet among those affected that that is too low and that level 6 should apply , in line with the appg ’s recommendations . the phso comments that a flat rate is easiest to implement but not perfect , and that there may well be a need for a balancing act , as my right hon . friend the phso also suggests that the national audit office may be able to provide guidance on how to structure a compensation scheme . the waspi group has emphasised , as we have heard , the need for speed , simplicity and sensitivity , and it recommends that the dwp should bring forward proposals for a financial redress scheme to parliament before the summer recess . it also proposes that higher payments should be targeted at those most impacted . the work and pensions committee is to be commended for getting out its recommendations in less than 10 days after its evidence session . it also asked the government to bring forward proposals for the summer recess . it , too , proposed that payments should be based on the extent of change to an individual ’s state pension age , and the notice of change that they received . it adds that there should be some flexibility for individuals to be able to make the case for a higher level of compensation based on experiencing direct financial loss . clear parameters as to the form that the compensation should take , i sense , are rapidly evolving . parliament , in the past two months since the phso published its report , in its various different guises is playing its role to the full . i would suggest that now is the time for the government to step up to the plate . a mechanism should be put in place before the summer recess . i acknowledge that the matter is complicated , and that there is a need for contemplation and reflection , but we should have in mind that the most notable achievement of this government is that , under enormous pressure in a very short timescale , they put in place a furlough scheme that saved hundreds of thousands of jobs and got us through covid . there is no reason why the government can not move with such speed and alacrity again . i would add that failure to comply with the phso ’s recommendations would be almost completely unprecedented over the 70 years that the ombudsman has existed and would drive a coach and horses through what is an integral part of our parliamentary system of democratic checks and balances . in conclusion , i support this motion . i pay tribute to my hon . friend i find it remarkable that the ombudsman has such little faith in the government that it is turning to parliament to try to find a resolution and a remedy . and we owe it to those waspi women to do so . we have taken an oath of office to our constituents — all of us — to find a resolution and a solution . sadly , it has become the business of this government to kick the can down the road , whatever the issue is . whether it is the horizon scandal , primodos or contaminated blood , it seems to have become an ingrained and institutional habit to kick the can down the road and make those who have suffered at the hands of government to wait even longer . a conservative member made the point about the cost of redress and remedy , and of course we must recognise that . but in doing so we must also recognise the money that has already been spent by the civil service and the money and the time that have been spent by our constituency staff and all of us . i suspect that the amount of money and time that has been spent on this report is almost equal to the money that needs to be paid to bring redress to the waspi women . while we are looking at what remedies we can find and what money can be sought , perhaps we should be looking at proceeds of crime money . perhaps we should be looking at the russian oligarchs who need to have their assets seized — or have had their assets seized — proper sanctions against those who launder money , and the dirty money that flows through the financial institutions of the uk . i have sat on bill committees in this house and seen the government take lacklustre action . the money is there ; it is about political will , as my hon . friend the member for north ayrshire and arran said . i have had many representations from the 6,500 waspi women in my livingston constituency , and today i want to give them a voice . shirley sharp was born in october 1954 . she took early retirement from the scottish government in december 2008 , when she was 54 . before deciding to leave , she contacted the pension service and received her forecast . she said : “ i knew when i left my job i would receive my pension on 6/3/2019 when i was 64 years 6 months old . after i left another 18 months was added to my pension age which i could n’t make provision for . to add insult to injury my husband is 8 months older than me and he received his pension 14 months before i did . if it was about equality why was i penalised 6 months more than men ? i have been in receipt of my state pension since 6/9/2020 . i am still very angry about how this whole thing has been / is being handled . ” another constituent , who did not want to be named , took early retirement from the civil service and looked after elderly relatives for four years until 11 months before her 60th birthday . at that point , her sister asked her whether she was planning on getting a part - time job . she said that she was exhausted and that she could manage financially as long as she got her pension in 11 months ’ time . she could not believe it when she was told that her pension at age would be 66 . she thought that her leg was being pulled . she phoned the dwp , which confirmed what she had been told , but she had “ never had any communication ” about this from the dwp . another constituent , anne seenan , missed out on £ 14,000 , having had her state pension delayed by two years . she said : “ i never received any communication from the dwp ” . another constituent , dianne risbridger , said : “ unfortunately i am one of the women affected by a chronic life limiting illness which adds to the distress , as well as being born a mere three weeks after the cut off date for appealing , so a double whammy in my case . ” another constituent , jill parton , is watching this debate . she is an incredible woman who i know well . she said : “ unfortunately , i am one of the tens of thousands of women , born in the 1950s , who have been badly affected by the rapid rise in state pension age for women . i worked part time while i was training to become a teacher and started full time working in august 1975 when i was 20 . i always expected that i would receive my state pension at age 60 . i married in 1977 and continued working full time . ” jill took six months off to have her two children . she separated from her husband before her son was born . she found out that she would not receive her state pension at 60 during a staff meeting . she reminded me today that her divorce settlement , like those of many of her constituents , was predicated on when she would get her state pension . unfortunately , she also lives with a diagnosis of fuchs ’ corneal dystrophy . the unpredictability of the condition , and the impact of teaching under bright lights , meant that she could not teach . she said : “ i find it very difficult to understand the government position on this . while they are making tens of thousands of women work until 66 they have even more young people who ca n’t get jobs . for the mental health of all concerned would it not be more economical to allow the 60 + women to retire and the young jobless to have their jobs ? ” mental health worries affect many people . jill is deeply concerned about the impact that the issue has had not just on her , but on many others . the bottom line is that we are talking about a social contract between our constituents and the government . many of these women have already suffered great discrimination throughout their lives and have not been able to pay their “ full stamp ” , as it was called back in the day . they had no idea this was going to happen . it is not good enough for some to say that the communication was adequate . putting out a press release is not proper communication . the government need to get a grip on this issue , and understand the profound impact that it has had on other constituents of mine : susan rankin , chaw atkinson , elizabeth donnelly , linda howieson , meg wilson , marion wight , margaret diamond , anne waugh and gloria fairgrieve . i wanted to read their names out because they are real people with real lives , and this is having a real impact on them . if there is one decent thing that the government could do before they are booted out of office , it would be to give the waspi women the justice that they deserve . i rise to speak on behalf of the 6,180 women across stockton south affected by this issue — women i come across every day in all corners of my constituency , and from all walks of life . my mother is a waspi woman . she found out while chatting to her sister . knowing my mother , that will have been an interesting conversation . i have had many conversations with constituents about the issue , and the impact that it has had on their life . none of them disputes the need to equalise the pension ages for men and women , and they all understand the challenges of communicating that change to the public , but they want justice and fair treatment from the system that they have spent their life paying into . after years of debate under governments of both colours , we have arrived at the point at which an independent ombudsman has told us that the waspi women were wronged ; maladministration occurred ; and there should be compensation for those women affected . the system that they paid into all their life was meant to provide them with comfort in retirement . they based their life plans around it , and now the parliamentary and health service ombudsman report confirms that the change was made without adequate notice . that had a huge impact on those affected and their families . these women lost the chance to make informed decisions in preparing for retirement . i have heard stories of women who worked all their life and deserved to retire with dignity , but who have instead been forced to rely on help from their husbands or even their children . those most affected were often those already vulnerable : widows and those living alone ; those with health issues ; and those already facing financial hardship . i am glad that we now have the ombudsman ’s report , but this issue has gone on for way too long . these women have waited a long time for justice , and as we have heard , for some it is now far too late . i pay tribute to all the waspi women in my constituency and further afield who have campaigned tirelessly for years , and exhausted every avenue to right this wrong . i urge the government to consider the report as quickly as possible , and ensure that the waspi women get the fair and fast compensation that they deserve . i thank we all know how we got here . for people watching at home , many women born in the 1950s retired at 60 in the belief that they would receive their full state pension , only to realise that the government had increased the retirement age by five years and not told them . many had handed in their notice at work , and in many cases those women were forced to exist on meagre welfare benefits that left them living a hand - to - mouth existence . many were left destitute . some even lost their home . many experienced depression , and some were even suicidal . that is a scandal and a clear injustice . i give my warmest thanks to all the 1950s women against state pension inequality campaign groups , on behalf of myself , the hon . member for waveney and all members of the all - party group . i also thank the 5,000 women in my constituency of salford and eccles who were born in the 1950s , in particular a lady called judith robertson and the women of the waspi campaign 2018 , who have set up stalls in our local supermarkets , and lobbied me and other mps on this important issue . we all recognise the determination and strength of these brave women . their relentless campaigning against this profound injustice is the reason why we are here today . the issue is not whether these women faced injustice ; the ombudsman ’s report makes it clear that they did , that the dwp was guilty of maladministration , that these women are entitled to compensation urgently from the government , and that parliament must urgently identify a mechanism for ensuring that . i will briefly make a few comments about the ombudsman ’s report for clarity . first , it is important to stress that the ombudsman has looked at only one aspect of injustice : maladministration by the dwp — that is , whether they adequately notified the women affected by the change to their pension age . the ombudsman ’s remit was not to look at the wider discriminatory impact of the policy ; that has been left unaddressed . sadly , the uk ’s pension system systematically favoured men in this age group . they often receive higher state pensions , and even higher private pensions . many of these women affected spent significant periods out of the workforce caring for their children and family members . that was coupled with a gender pay gap that was far more acute during their time in the workforce than it is today , so they were already at a disadvantage in terms of their ability to contribute to their private and state pensions . the only element that went some small way towards addressing the gender pension gap was that the national insurance pension was paid to women from age 60 , whereas it was paid to men from age 65 . obviously , that advantage was taken away . the fairness and the gender impact of the policy need to be urgently addressed , and i hope that we continue to fight for that in this house , but today we are focusing on the ombudsman ’s findings . the key finding was that the failure by the dwp to adequately inform thousands of women of their state pension age constitutes maladministration . the ombudsman also found that , as a result , some women had lost opportunities to make informed decisions about their finances , and that the dwp ’s failure had diminished women ’s sense of personal autonomy and financial control . the ombudsman also recommended that the dwp acknowledge its failings and apologise for its impact on those affected . the report concludes very clearly that the women concerned are entitled to compensation urgently . we have discussed what the remedy could look like , and the report is very clear that it leaves that open to parliament to determine . crucially , it says that finite resources should not be used as an excuse for failing to provide a fair remedy . this is a clear injustice and should be treated as one . if we go down the path of deciding which injustices are and are not deserving , we are in very dangerous territory . the report also points out that hm treasury requires compensation schemes to be efficient and effective , and to deliver value for money . in particular , any administrative costs associated with compensation schemes should not be excessive . that leads the ombudsman to suggest that while parliament might favour a mechanism for assessing individual claims of injustice , it might want to consider the point that a flat - rate payment would deliver a more efficient resolution . a note of caution here : it is important that we consider the impact of that carefully , as some women may be paid far less compensation than they are entitled to . on the amount of redress , as we heard from the hon . member for waveney , the ombudsman ’s guidance on financial remedy sets out six levels of compensation . the ombudsman suggests that solely in the very small set of six cases that it assessed , the range could be within level 4 , but in further sessions with the work and pensions committee last week , it acknowledged that that small subset may not cover all the extreme financial situations that many women affected have faced ; that could be addressed by an appropriate redress mechanism that parliament looks at . all the women ’s campaign groups that have contacted the all - party group so far have stated that setting compensation at level 4 would be grossly insufficient , and i agree . when gathering evidence , the all - party group found that in a vast number of cases the injustice was actually at level 6 , and that was the recommendation that the all - party group made to the ombudsman . a whole range of options are being discussed , from a flat - rate payment to a flat - rate tapered payment , the bell curve that the hon . member for waveney spoke about , a flat - rate payment with top - ups over a five - year period or mediation for 1950s women alongside an initial payment , to address the full scale of loss and discrimination faced . whatever option parliament chooses to take , it is important that it is not means - tested , that it is fast , fair and enshrined in legislation and , most importantly , that it garners the support of the women affected . however , there is one major hurdle before us . before we even get to the point of discussing and fine - tuning any proposals the government have , they must first lay before parliament their proposed redress mechanism . there is no excuse for delay . the report was laid before parliament in march ; it is now may , and still we have no government response . it is just not acceptable . we have heard that nearly 280,000 women have already died waiting for justice and as we speak , at least one woman will die waiting for justice every 13 minutes . i say to the government , “ just do the right thing and , as a matter of urgency , lay before parliament a mechanism for redress so we can all act in accordance with the ombudsman ’s recommendations . ” i begin by commending my hon . friend those include women such as mary barclay from bellshill , who came to my advice surgery just on friday to ask me to come to this house today and ask this government to do the right thing by her and the thousands of other women who have had the rug pulled out from underneath them . she also spoke to me about some of the 280,000 women who have died during this fight for justice and how , along with thousands across my coatbridge , chryston and bellshill constituency , she will continue to fight for what they are entitled to . i put on record my thanks to mary for the time she spent informing me of the real and deep impact that this issue has had on her in later life . across scotland , it is estimated that almost 356,000 women were impacted by the waspi pension scandal . many of the women affected were already in ill health . others had taken early retirement and were planning to get by until the age of 60 , when they thought they would receive their state pension . however , westminster tories had a different idea . the uk government instead invented reasons for countless delays in the hopes that the waspi women would simply go away , but i think they have proven that they will not go away — no chance . their campaign for justice continues . i return to that figure of some 280,000 women who have passed away without seeing the justice that was owed to them . as many as 40,000 woman are dying every year without getting any form of compensation . that is outrageous and wilful neglect of the duty of any government . it is shameful . it is a betrayal of the most callous kind of those impacted by the uk government ’s maladministration . the snp welcomes the findings of the phso ’s report , and it is clear that the westminster government must now take responsibility for the hardships that they have caused women born in the 1950s and make urgent amends for mistakes made . waspi women have been struggling for years now with this injustice , and just about every other whim and decision that emanates from this place has also taken its toll . we have heard about the horizon scandal and the infected blood scandal , but there is also the cut to pension credit for mixed - age couples , the freezing of the hard - earned state pensions of pensioners living overseas , and this government ’s scrapping of free tv licences for the over-75s . all those decisions impact on waspi women . on top of the self - inflicted cost of living crisis , it is just becoming too much for some of them . the uk government must not only apologise for the harms caused by their clear and obvious maladministration , but act urgently to deliver the justice and the compensation that these women so richly deserve . the report is clear and damning . it has made a finding of failings by the dwp in this case and has ruled that the women affected are owed compensation . the phso ’s chief executive rebecca hilsenrath said : “ dwp has clearly indicated that it will refuse to comply . ” that is outrageous . she continued : “ this is unacceptable . the department must do the right thing and it must be held to account for failure to do so . ” to this very day the dwp has not acknowledged its failings . it has also failed to offer any apology or explanation , and has indicated that it will not compensate women affected by its failure . the snp here in westminster and in government in holyrood has always supported and will continue to support the waspi women and their valiant efforts , yet many here in westminster who were previously very vocal in supporting the waspi women have now fallen eerily silent . the very same can be said for prominent tory and labour figures up the road in holyrood as well . on “ agrees that the uk government must now urgently deliver on the ombudsman ’s recommendations to pay compensation in full to those women without delay ” . that motion passed in the scottish parliament with votes from the snp , the liberal democrats , the scottish greens and the alba party . the tories and the labour party shamefully abstained on that vote , and that speaks volumes . it certainly speaks a lot more than the silence that comes from their benches . i have to say that , if the waspi women are pinning their hopes on an incoming labour administration , they probably need to prepare themselves for yet more despair . why is that ? they need only familiarise themselves with the lengths that the labour administration in north lanarkshire council went to in order to avoid paying out on equal pay claims owed to women over many years — spending millions upon millions of pounds on legal fees in the process of fighting those justified claims , and then losing . the same happened , as we have heard , in labour - run glasgow city council . those two parties , the tories and labour , are not interested in equality for women ; the evidence is before us , friends , so forgive me if i have no faith whatsoever in the change that the labour party is purporting to offer . labour could , of course , surprise us ; it could support the state pension age ( compensation ) bill in the name of my hon . friend it is clear that only a strong snp voice in holyrood and here in westminster can hold this or any uk government to account , whether it be a tory or a labour- led government . we have heard demands that the secretary of state here in westminster should apologise , and quite clearly he should , but my hon . friend will remember that 10 years ago , almost to the day , a very senior former labour prime minister was doing the rounds in scotland , speaking at meetings of middle - aged and elderly people , promising them categorically that their pensions were safe with any united kingdom government . does my hon . friend believe that it is now time that an apology came from that politician for the way that he deceived and misled millions of people in scotland ? my hon . friend makes an excellent point . that was just one of the mistruths we were told during that campaign — we were also told that we would maintain our place in the european union . the waspi women have been completely shafted , for want of a better word , by the politicians who were charged with delivering justice for them . the snp and the scottish government in holyrood stand ready to engage with the department for work and pensions when the uk government finally agree to compensate the waspi women . there is still hope that this government will agree to do so , because justice should be done . after years of promises made by tory and labour mps and msps , both parties are now refusing to accept the report ’s recommendation to compensate fully the women who have been impacted . it is time for the tory and labour parties to stop dithering and to put the funding in place so that these women can get the justice they deserve before it is too late . it should also be crystal clear once again — this is not an extreme proposition and it should not be seen as such — that the only way to protect scotland ’s pensioners from the whims of westminster governments and to ensure dignity and fairness in retirement is for scotland to have the full powers of its independence . this issue is very close to my heart , and i thank i have been acutely aware of the 1950s women ’s state pension injustice for a long time . i have family and friends , as well as thousands of constituents , who have been impacted by it . since i was elected in 2017 , i have written to and met numerous women in gower born in the 1950s who have shared their experiences and told me of the profound impact this issue has had on their lives . i led an adjournment debate on the matter back in 2019 , and have worked to represent women affected throughout my time as an mp , by supporting their complaints to the ombudsman and speaking at every opportunity . the then conservative chancellor ’s decision to accelerate increases in the state pension age in the pensions act 2011 produced considerable hardship for many women , as it meant that a lot of them received little notice of an increase in their state pension age . the government failed to communicate the changes effectively : some women were given only one year ’s notice , while others got up to five years ’ notice , but many received none at all . that put those women in a serious position . women who had already made plans based on previous pension statements had to scramble on and continue to work to make ends meet . women ’s income in retirement is already significantly affected by unequal and low pay at work , pregnancy discrimination , discrimination against part - time workers and a lack of affordable childcare and carer support . recently , my constituent carrie williams came to visit my surgery . she was in the first cohort of women affected . initial leaflets on changes stated that the increase to 65 would happen in 2020 . she then received a letter in 2013 informing her that the changes would be in force from 2018 , and would gradually increase from then , meaning that she would have to wait not until she was 65 , but until her 66th birthday — an extra year — before being able to receive her state pension . following a period of poor health , the knowledge that she would not be getting her pension for several years more made her increasingly stressed and — combined with other issues that she had with the dwp at the time , which were affecting her income — led to her again falling ill and having a seizure . correspondence of the various changes was littered with suggestions that carrie pay for a financial advisor , which as a single mother in poor health she could not afford to do . she did not have spare cash just lying around to set up a new savings pots , an isa or anything else that was suggested as an apparent solution to her problem . i am glad to share that carrie is now in good health , but unfortunately for her , as for many of the women affected , that was not the end of it . not only did she unexpectedly have to wait until 66 to access her state pension , but the amount that she receives from it has drastically reduced year on year due to fiscal drag . i would not have believed it had carrie not brought me about six or seven years - worth of evidence . this conservative government ’s recklessness with our economy is squeezing everyone ’s finances — i have seen it with my own eyes — and exacerbating the hardships that the waspi women have already endured . this has been a long and frustrating process for the women affected . several groups represent them . the women against state pension inequality campaign is probably the best known , but there is also the pension justice for swansea women campaign , which includes women from my constituency and others in the local area . a lot was hinging on the ombudsman ’s report . it took some time , but we now have it . it is a serious report that requires serious consideration , and the government must not use it to continue kicking the can down the road , as they have done over the past 14 years . the report found the dwp guilty of maladministration . the secretary of state said in march that he would provide a further update to the house on the matter , but is yet to do so . he should update parliament , or tell us when he will finally do so . although there are strong feelings and a variety of asks , the overarching issue is that an injustice must be addressed . lessons must be learned to ensure that this never reoccurs , and that everyone has the right to properly plan for their retirement . i thank my hon . friend it is my privilege to speak on behalf of waspi women , particularly those in the falkirk waspi women group , who have been with me for a long time . i held a public meeting way back in 2015 for the approximately 7,000 women in my constituency who are affected by the state pension age change . i discovered that the overwhelming majority of those who attended had not received any notification of the changes . the majority of women were only one year away from the original retirement age of 60 years , and faced a further six years of working life without any warning . many had already started to make plans to retire because of ill health or their caring duties for grandchildren and/or elderly parents . it was not just the women who were badly affected by these changes ; family members also had to make changes or other arrangements in their lives . a cohort of the falkirk women got together and formed the falkirk group in 2016 . they made arrangements to join the very first demo down here in london in june 2016 . since then , they have participated in other demos — both here and in scotland — and in 2019 , they published a calendar , from which all proceeds went to breast cancer care . local co - ordinator anne campbell and i have had many discussions and meetings about this issue , along with other stalwarts of the group — namely , may rookes , mags burns , lorna binnie , sheila harkness , elizabeth lumsden , maureen mcleod , valerie sutter , ruth mcintosh , helen reeder , may farrell , elspeth slater and many other women campaigning on this total injustice . i pay tribute to them all . the falkirk women are positive and strong in their endeavour to right the wrong that was foisted upon them in the cruellest and most calculating way . i praise them and the rest of the waspi women for their organisational skills . they would like an apology and compensation for the turmoil thrust upon them . they want respect , dignity , and , most importantly , a fair and fast compensation scheme to redress the injustice . it is fair to say that those women are not going away , so the government ignore them at their peril . the waspi women need an answer , and they need it now — no more unnecessary delays . the government can and should resolve this pitiful state of affairs here and now , and do the right and proper thing by putting an end to this bureaucratic shambles . they must not procrastinate any longer . action is required , not more words . stop insulting the waspi women . compensate them now , with speed and simplicity . i pay tribute to all the waspi women and others campaigning on this issue in wirral west and across the uk , and those who are in the gallery this afternoon . i stand in solidarity with them — i myself am a 1950s - born woman . i pay tribute to all who have sadly passed away , too . i believe it is important to consider the broader pensions landscape , and the discriminatory and quite frankly sexist nature of provision that has adversely affected 1950s - born women . for example , rules that required a fixed number of qualifying years to be eligible for a pension have disproportionately adversely affected women . in 1973 , the right to a deferred pension was introduced for those who left service on or after part - time workers have been similarly adversely affected by the design of pension schemes . there is insufficient time to provide detail today ; however , women have clearly been disproportionately affected by that , too , as they are by the current earnings threshold of £ 10,000 per year for auto - enrolment . again , i ask the minister to look at addressing that discriminatory element of what is otherwise a very important policy that affects large numbers of women and men on low pay . women born in the 1950s have already been adversely affected by pensions policy . the pensions gender gap is still high : analysis by the dwp published in 2023 put that gap at 35 % , meaning that women have 35 % less private pension wealth than men at age 55 , the minimum age at which most people can start to take their pension . women have less state pension , too : analysis by the institute for fiscal studies last year showed that women born in the early 1950s receive around 5 % less state pension income than men . the reasons included having spent less time in paid employment compared with women born in later periods , and the way that the rules for entitlement to the state pension before the introduction of the new state pension in 2016 created a significant gap between pensions for men and women . for example , before 1978 , married women could opt to pay a married women ’s stamp , meaning that they paid lower national insurance contributions and then received a lower state pension . it is scandalous , too , that many of the women who paid that married women ’s stamp did not receive all the pension that they should have been entitled to , due to the complex rules and computer errors by the dwp . then , of course , the gender pay gap means that women are paying on average less into their occupational pensions . all those things are still affecting women today , so it is in that context that i ask the minister to act swiftly in relation to the parliamentary and health service ombudsman ’s report on women ’s state pension age . the waspi campaign has shone a light on how the changes affected women : many 1950s - born women found out about the changes to their state pension age at a time that was too late for them to alter their retirement plans . others have said that they had no idea that they would have to wait longer to receive their state pension . as a result , many women have suffered financial hardship and emotional distress . a survey of around 8,000 waspi women carried out in december of last year found that in the previous six months , 55 % of waspi women had seen their economic position get worse , 49 % had struggled to pay essential bills , and shockingly , 25 % had struggled to buy food . as we have heard from members right across this house , our constituents have spoken about how they have been personally affected . one woman in wirral west told me that she had struggled to feed herself and had had to sell her home as a result of how she was affected . another constituent wrote to me recently to say that she feels robbed of her future , and still feels that she is being ignored . it is insulting to those women that the minister has barely acknowledged the clear maladministration that the ombudsman says occurred . can he tell us today when his department will acknowledge that maladministration , and will he apologise for it ? because of “ significant concerns ” that the ombudsman has “ that dwp will fail to remedy the injustice ” , it has taken the “ rare decision ” to bring matters to parliament ’s attention , and specifically to ask parliament “ to intervene and identify a mechanism for providing appropriate remedy ” . the ombudsman ’s report sets out what that remedy might look like . it also says that it is “ open to dwp to forestall this process ” by acting on what the ombudsman says to parliament . will the minister take this opportunity to do just that — to look carefully at what the ombudsman has said , and come forward with fair and fast compensation for the women affected ? jane cowley , the waspi campaign manager , said last week at a work and pensions select committee oral evidence hearing that “ we have attempted to meet with the minister throughout our campaign but unfortunately those requests have never been accepted . ” this is incredibly disappointing . that campaign is acting on behalf of 3.5 million women adversely affected — it is utterly astonishing that the minister should show them such little respect . time is of the essence for the government to put things right . according to the waspi campaign group , by this weekend , 280,000 waspi women will have died since their fight for justice began . to put it another way , as has already been said in this house , one woman dies every 13 minutes . the government talk about supporting all pensioners to have a dignified retirement , but can the minister honestly stand at the dispatch box and say that his government are treating these waspi women with the dignity and respect they deserve ? last week , at the select committee ’s oral evidence hearing , angela madden , the chair of the waspi campaign , expressed frustration that the dwp “ have never accepted that they have done anything wrong ” . when will the government remedy the injustice that so many 1950s - born women have faced ? ministers must apologise to those women who have suffered as a result of government failings , and must bring forward fair and fast compensation as a matter of urgency . i commend on monday , we had an impassioned debate in this place about the role of members , and speech after speech stated that we in this place must uphold the highest standards and set the best example of good practice . there were arguments made by others about the importance of democracy and representation , and i may not have agreed with the conclusions they reached from those arguments in many cases , but i can not fault their dedication to this place and to the job that we do here on behalf of our constituents . we should all therefore be able to support the basic idea that , when someone is wronged , and an independent body investigates and makes recommendations for recompense , those recommendations must be actioned . “ significant concerns … that dwp will fail to remedy the injustice ” and acknowledge the maladministration . what does that say ? i expect the minister will say that the department needs more time to consider its response , but having listened to the other members who have participated in the debate so far , i think many of us have no time for that any more , and certainly the waspi women do not . i listened with interest to the injustice that waspi women have faced is simply shameful . the financial burden has been outlined , but the anxiety they feel is also huge . a constituent has contacted me to tell me that the ordeal has had an enormous and horrible negative effect on her mental health , because she simply feels so powerless to do anything about it . does my hon . friend agree that this government should immediately confirm that they will honour the ombudsman ’s recommendations , and come forward with a proper plan to compensate the millions of affected women ? i am grateful to my hon . friend for her intervention , and i absolutely agree with her . we have had the report for some time , and i think the government should be making a statement to say that they support it . it is quite clear that plenty of work has been done by both the appg and the ombudsman to outline what a compensation scheme should look like . my hon . friend is right about the mental impact . i met a constituent of mine , heather , several weeks ago . she is a single woman , so she does not have a partner ’s or spouse ’s income — that is the assumption made about women — to rely on . she has had to give up work as a teacher earlier than expected due to ill health , and feels that the injustice is compounded by the government not having yet acknowledged the ombudsman ’s report properly . the dwp has had full notice of the investigation by the phso and its findings , and i would argue that they should therefore have had the opportunity to plan accordingly . with regard to the infected blood scandal , the government have said that when the report is finally published on monday , they will make a statement on what they will do very quickly thereafter . i feel , therefore , unmoved by the argument that they need more time to respond to the ombudsman ’s report , when they have known for some time that it was coming . the first report on maladministration was published almost three years ago , so i just do not accept that the government and the dwp have not had the time to consider the likely outcome of the findings . we knew that a recommendation for compensation was likely , so i would have expected the dwp to have started making plans for administering it . while sitting in the chamber , i have been notified by my researcher that i have had a response to a written parliamentary question , which states that the department did not have sight of a draft copy of the phso ’s report at the end of last year . my researcher has also confirmed with the waspi campaign — i have met angela madden and others several times — who say that that is not the case , and that the government did have sight of the draft report . i would be grateful for clarity from the minister on that . i am happy to give way to him now—[interruption ] — or perhaps he can comment on that written response to the parliamentary question in his closing remarks . is it correct that the government did not have sight of the draft report at the end of last year ? on a point of order , mr deputy speaker . opposition members are complaining about the fact that i dip my head in order to listen , and suggest that is somehow evidence of me not listening . i take exception to their criticism of my body position . your comments stand on the record . thank you , mr deputy speaker . i certainly was not suggesting that to the minister . i am saying that i have two different versions of events . the waspi campaign is saying that the draft report was seen by the dwp at the end of last year , and i have a written response from the government saying that it was not . if the response to the written parliamentary question is found to be inaccurate , i would be grateful if the minister wrote to me to confirm that . if he is unable to conform that in his closing remarks , i would be grateful if he would place that letter in the commons library . i have done a lot of work with the minister . previously he was heavily involved with me in the all - party parliamentary group on ending the need for food banks , so i know that he cares about people , but i really do not want to hear in his closing remarks that this is just the department being thorough . like many here , i have met waspi women , and the campaigners who stand in the rain outside parliament on budget days . i have spoken to group leaders and to my constituents . the one message they want me to bring here today is that they are dying . they are dying without the dwp admitting to its errors , without any acknowledgement of the impact that this has had on their lives , without compensation , and without resolution . frankly , they now feel that the government are waiting for them to die , in order for the problem literally to cease to exist . waspi women deserve compensation — that is not just my view or the view of many members in the house ; it is the view of the ombudsman . if we in this place can not adhere to the findings of the parliamentary and health service ombudsman , what message are we sending from this place generally ? mr deputy speaker : “ i was plunged into huge anger … upset … distress . i felt like i had been scammed . why had n’t anyone told me my pension age had changed ? why had n’t i known about it ? ” those are the words of hilary , who , like millions of other women born in the 1950s , was hit by the change in the state pension age . hilary was left tens of thousands of pounds worse off . she had budgeted for her state pension beginning at 60 , not six years later . she struggled to make ends meet and started to look for another job , but she asked , “ who ’s going to employ a woman in her late 50s ? ” hilary was not alone . millions of women born in the 1950s were robbed of their pensions . a survey carried out by the women against state pension inequality campaign , to whose tireless advocacy i pay tribute today , particularly those waspi women in coventry south , found that half the women surveyed struggled to pay essential bills , and one in four struggled to put food on the table . but it was not just the financial hit ; it was the worry , stress and the feeling that they had made a mistake , and that it was their fault they did not know that the pension age had changed . the ombudsman ’s report puts that to bed once and for all . the fault for not knowing was not with those women ; the fault was with the government and the department for work and pensions . there was maladministration in communicating the changes and an injustice was done . that is what the ombudsman concluded , and it utterly vindicates the waspi campaign . justice delayed is justice denied , and every 13 minutes a waspi woman passes away and is forever denied justice . since the beginning of their campaign , 280,000 women affected by the pension change have passed away , never to see this wrong righted . it is utterly scandalous that the government seem intent on dragging their feet for as long as they can . on almost two months have passed , another 6,000 waspi women have passed away and still this government are doing nothing . the government have still failed to heed the report ’s recommendation “ to identify a mechanism for providing appropriate remedy for those who have suffered injustice ” , and that is no surprise . the report concludes that it strongly doubts that the dwp will provide a remedy to the injustice , so it is up to this place and all our colleagues to rise to this challenge and to right this wrong . we have a recent example of that happening . after the post office horizon scandal was brought to life in a tv drama , the government responded to the public outcry and introduced legislation to address that injustice . it was the right thing to do , but it should not take toby jones and itv for the government to do their job . they need to act , and act now . i will finish with this : the ombudsman ’s report is right that an injustice was done . these women lost out . some were made tens of thousands of pounds worse off by these changes . they were made to feel like they had made a mistake , as if the fault was theirs . the stress and pain has been immense . i will conclude by saying that not only must the government compensate these women as a matter of urgency , but they must go beyond what has been recommended by the ombudsman , which is not nearly enough to cover the hurt , distress and lost income faced by many of these women . i join the waspi campaign in calling for fast and fair compensation , giving justice to women who have been denied it for too long already . i , too , thank my hon . friend there were an estimated 3.8 million waspi women , although 280,000 have died since the start of the campaign , including my constituents margaret meikle and morag syne . those women died without receiving the compensation , apology or justice that they rightly deserved . there are about 6,800 waspi women in ayr , carrick and cumnock . to some people , they are just numbers ; to me , every single one of them is an individual — a daughter and possibly a mother , a grandmother , a wife , a sister , an auntie , a carer and a friend . they are important . they matter . they have all had their hopes , expectations and aspirations of retiring at 60 with a reasonable pension crushed by a lack of notice of a change to their pension age by the government . each and every one of them deserved to be treated properly , and the grave injustice they have suffered should be put right by the government . since my first contact with a waspi constituent nine years ago , many have written to me and met me , expressing their frustration , dealing with burnout , caring for elderly relatives and missing out on time with partners , children and grandchildren , all in the context of a cost of living crisis . many have also commented on the lack of pension income and having to use savings to survive , preventing them from buying clothes and presents for their grandchildren and seriously restricting any discretionary spending that would have been spent in the local economy . above all , they are left with an overwhelming sense of injustice at not being informed of changes to their state pension age , which has left them understandably angry and resentful . the lack of information and the denial of choice by the government has resulted in a reduced quality of life , serious financial losses , and sustained damage to their sense of worth , mental health and wellbeing . my hon . friend mentions the enormous toll on the mental health and wellbeing of so many of these women . does he agree that that damage has been deliberately made worse by the fact that they , almost alone of the millions of people who have suffered from grave injustices and miscarriages of justice , have had a government who claim to be looking after them publicly say , “ we will ignore the results of an independent inquiry and deny the fact that any injustice has been carried out against them ” ? i could not agree more with my hon . friend . how much might it cost to properly compensate the waspi women ? in march , the times estimated that to pay them the ombudsman ’s paltry offer of between £ 1,000 and £ 2,850 would cost between £ 3.5 billion and £ 10 billion . the waspi campaign is calling for about three times as much—£10,000 — which would put the cost to the public purse at about £ 36 billion . it may be slightly more or slightly less , but by not paying the waspi women the pensions they rightly deserve to date , the government have already saved £ 181.4 billion . in only the last eight months of 2023 , according to the office for national statistics , uk government total expenditure was £ 755 billion . the compensation demanded by the waspi women is insignificant in that context . the failed covid test and trace system in england cost £ 37 billion , paid to former talktalk chief executive — and wife of a conservative member — dido harding for no reason whatsoever . that amount alone would have paid full compensation to all the waspi women to date . as many as 3.8 million women were given the news that their state pension age was to increase from 60 to 66 just as they were about to retire , so too late for them to do any proper financial planning . many were already in ill health or worse , and others had taken early retirement with a plan to get by until age 60 , when they thought they would receive their state pension and look forward to a reasonably comfortable retirement . this is a long tale of suffering , misery and injustice not only for the women affected , but endured by their immediate and extended families . it has been allowed to go on for far too long . it needs to be concluded without further delay . i therefore call on the government to apologise unreservedly and to act to compensate women affected by the worst pension scandal in history . they must do so immediately before even more waspi women die without having received an apology , compensation or justice . i urge the dwp to bring proposals to parliament for a financial redress scheme for all members to debate and vote on , including a mechanism for mps to put forward alternatives before the summer recess . in those proposals , the government should set out eligibility for the compensation scheme , the amounts of compensation to be paid , the administration of the scheme and the timeframe for compensation to be paid . waspi women everywhere have campaigned to right this injustice , but may i pay tribute to the tireless work of frances brown and lynn paterson , the local waspi co - ordinators from my area , who have given their best and their lives to obtain compensation for all the other waspi women in our area and across the country ? i thank them for their support . it is an honour to follow i want to extend my personal appreciation to the dedicated women of the waspi campaign who have tirelessly campaigned for nearly a decade for fair and timely compensation for 1950s women affected by the dwp ’s maladministration . i do not recognise the criticism of labour members . i think that i have raised waspi cases on 25 occasions in 12 different debates and remember how many members were in their place . i remember a westminster hall debate where members were sitting on the window sills because it was so crowded . every effort has been made to bring this injustice to the attention of the public and the government . i thank the sunderland , durham and hartlepool waspi groups , who have worked diligently and assiduously in my constituency . i have had the pleasure of meeting and working with those remarkable women over the past decade , and i am full of admiration for their dedication and selflessness . there are around 5,000 waspi women in my constituency , who have been waiting patiently for the final ombudsman ’s report , which was published in march . i am appalled that the dwp refuses to comply with the report ’s recommendations . this unprecedented response undermines the ombudsman ’s authority and credibility . the library found no other instances of a government department rejecting an ombudsman ’s findings . the dwp must own its mistakes , apologise to the 3.8 million women affected and swiftly deliver adequate compensation . there is no doubt that the dwp failed to notify 1950s women of their state pension age change , and now it denies its wrongdoings , as the phso highlighted . ignoring the ombudsman ’s findings sets a dangerous precedent , allowing government departments to evade accountability . we mps have a responsibility to ensure that the government establish a mechanism for redress . the urgency is critical . i do not want to rehearse the statistics , because they have been given many times , but the 1950s women are dying in numbers because of the age profile . in march , the secretary of state promised an update , but as far as i am aware we are still waiting for that . the government ’s standard delay tactics — evident in cases such as the mineworkers ’ pension scheme , the contaminated blood scandal , the post office horizon scandal and now the waspi women — must end . the impact of the state pension age rise on those women , with little or no notice , is profound . the appg on state pension inequality for women , chaired by my hon . friend there is no doubt that the dwp ’s maladministration has caused immense stress . the evidence aligns that with the phso ’s definition of level 6 emotional injustice , warranting compensation of up to £ 10,000 . as members have said , the government have saved £ 181.5 billion by accelerating the raising of the women ’s state pension age . compensating waspi women by up to £ 10,000 would cost around £ 36 billion . that is a fraction of the savings accrued by the treasury to date . i recently met my constituents denise mckenna and kathleen kerr , who illustrate the severe impact this issue has had . both started work at 16 . kathy joined the british army and denise started work at the inland revenue . in their late 50s they took early retirement due to ill health . they carefully managed their finances . they had only a few years , they thought , until they reached their retirement . as a married couple who were both waspi women , kathy and denise suffered a double whammy — an immense financial loss , due to the pension age change . they received no written notification of the change . the five - year delay to their pension meant that they lost in excess of £ 80,000 . they exhausted their life savings and were forced to sell their home . surely that is not how we respect those who have worked and served our country . many waspi women like denise and kathy made significant life decisions without knowing that their pension age had increased . that injustice demands financial redress . women were forced to return to work , despite disabilities and conditions . that highlights this government ’s disconnect from the realities that these women faced . a former pensions minister , successive governments have failed these women . it is our responsibility and the duty of this parliament to right this wrong . sadly , it is too late for the over 200,000 waspi women who have passed away since the campaign started in 2015 , but we can not delay any longer . compensation is not just financial reimbursement , but recognition of the harm inflicted on these women . my appeal to the minister is this : heed the calls for justice , and acknowledge the emotional and psychological harm caused by the government ’s decisions and the dwp ’s maladministration . as representatives of thousands of 1950s women , it is our responsibility as members of parliament to ensure that justice is served . it is a considerable pleasure to follow my friend , it is worth reflecting that the parliamentary and health service ombudsman has asked parliament to find a remedy for the waspi women who have suffered injustice ; it strongly doubts that the dwp will provide a remedy . let us just consider that . the ombudsman has proclaimed that maladministration has taken place , so it would be fair to expect the dwp to accept its moral and ethical responsibility to the women affected and their elected parliamentarians , and to bring forward effective remedies for that maladministration . the report was published a couple of months ago , but we had the interim report three years ago , so the report is not a surprise to any of us here . the government knew this day was coming , and must now act with haste to bring forward remedies for the waspi women . the government , if they are meant to be anything , are supposed to be rooted in fairness , recognising their duty to citizens , and when a judgment is made that there has been maladministration , they should respond in an appropriate and timely manner . it is a damning indictment that the ombudsman has no faith in the government to provide the remedy , and has therefore taken the unprecedented step of asking parliament to intervene . it means that we parliamentarians must in effect do the government ’s job for them . collectively , members from right across the chamber have to rise to that challenge . all of us here , every single member of parliament , has a responsibility to their constituents , many of whom will be looking at us today , whether from the gallery or on television , waiting for us to take action . we can not have any more procrastination . we need to take action . let us remind ourselves that there were 3.8 million waspi women—1950s - born women who were affected by changes to the state pension age . they suffered from poor communication , which adversely affected the life choices that they were forced to make . this issue must be resolved by this parliament . it must not be kicked down the road until after the election . the scottish national party westminster group commissioned a report on potential financial remedies for waspi women , which was presented to the uk government as long ago as june 2016 but which , sadly , was ignored . if the government need advice , they might want to turn to landman economics , which produced that report . parliament has , of course , debated this issue many times , in the chamber and in westminster hall , and the work of the appg should be commended . on does my right hon . friend not think that that was , regrettably , typical of the attitude of this uk government to the waspi women ? the government hope that they will simply go away if they are ignored . that is heaping insult on indignity , and it is wholly unacceptable . the lives of constituents such as mine have been destroyed by the uk government ’s inability to see what needs to be done . they deserve so much better from this government . of course they do . we have heard today from a great many members in all parts of the house about the 5,000 , 6,000 or 7,000 waspi women — more , in some cases — in every constituency . we have all heard the heartbreaking stories of those who simply could not afford to carry on working , and who were not given adequate notice of the increase in the state pension age . it was an injustice , and it needs to be dealt with . i should emphasise that this was never about the equalisation of men ’s and women ’s pensionable ages ; we all accept that there had to be such an equalisation . however , some of us will remember the 2016 cridland review of pensions . cridland said that there should be no more than a one - year increase in anyone ’s pensionable age in every decade . the problem was the pace of the increase in women ’s pensionable age . let us also remember that this is about women who paid national insurance in anticipation of receiving a pension , and who were hit with the bombshell that their pensions were being deferred , in many cases by up to six years , with , in some cases , only 15 months ’ written notice . a state pension should be seen as a right , but the government changed the terms and conditions of that right without consulting those who were paid their pensions . some time ago , thanks to freedom of information requests , we learned that the department for work and pensions did not begin writing to women born between april 1950 and april 1955 until april 2009 , and did not complete the process until february 2012 . despite the need to inform women about changes to legislation dating back to 1995 , the government did not start the formal notification period for 14 years . what were they doing ? where was the responsibility to the women affected ? taking 14 years to begin informing women that a pension that they had paid into was being deferred is quite something . can we imagine the outcry if a private pension provider behaved in such a way ? there would be an outcry in this house , and no doubt there would be legal action . given that entitlement to a state pension is earned through national insurance contributions , with many women having made contributions for more than 40 years , that is quite staggering . a woman born on think about receiving such a letter . you think you are on the verge of retirement , and the rug has been pulled from under you — no wonder there is a need to pay compensation to those affected . the new pensionable age was three years and three months later than such an individual might have expected . with just 15 months ’ notice , what she thought was a contract that she had with the government was simply ripped up . the implications of all this have left women with no time to put alternative plans in place , despite many having looked forward to imminent retirement . then we have the issue of the change supposedly being phased in gradually . we were dealing with a three - month increase in women ’s pensionable age for each calendar month that passed . it was simply scandalous that women ’s pensionable age was rising so rapidly . that is why today we have the moral duty to immediately correct a wrong . this has gone on for too long . as has been said , sadly , 288,000 waspi women have died since the campaign started . another dies every 13 minutes , and a number have no doubt died while we have been having this afternoon ’s debate . we have the ombudsman ’s report , and we have to put in place remedies now . the dwp has to play a part in bringing forward proposals for a financial redress scheme before the summer recess , and those proposals must be amendable . most importantly , any scheme must clear the parliamentary process before the summer recess . we do not have long — less than nine weeks of parliamentary time . this means that within days — i have respect for the minister , as she knows — the dwp must come forward with proposals . will the minister respond appropriately to that demand ? it is now nearly two months since the ombudsman ’s report , and we can not wait any longer . so many of the waspi women who have suffered as a result of maladministration should have received financial remedy , which is why we must now take action , and this must not be a party political matter . it ought to be about all of us recognising a wrong that needs to be righted , and i appeal to members from right across the chamber to recognise our responsibility to do the right thing . let us make sure that the waspi women get an apology and get compensation . this has been a timely and very powerful debate . we have heard some incredible contributions from many members , who have shared first - hand knowledge of their constituents and the way they have been treated . i was very moved by what was said by this debate would not be happening if it was not for the bravery of the waspi women campaigners over many years . i have always been impressed by their verve and the demands that they bring to any occasion , and by their dressing appropriately in suffragette colours — one can not miss them at any event or meeting anywhere . we should pay tribute to all of them for the incredible work that they have put into drawing attention to this grotesque injustice over many years . they deserve to know that they will get an answer that will give them some comfort and hope . in the last decade , only three or four ombudsman ’s reports have gone to parliament because the government have refused to acknowledge or accept them . the whole principle of the ombudsman is that it is an independent , non - political office that makes recommendations on the basis of the evidence it has collected . it went to a great deal of trouble to collect evidence and chose a sample of cases to give a holistic view on the situation , so the very least we can do is expect that the government will undertake to act on the report . i was very impressed by the work and pensions committee ’s evidence session on the waspi women came up during the last two general election campaigns , and let us be absolutely clear that my right hon . friend many would say that parliament is now confronted with a problem not of its own making , and that it has to do something to try to resolve the issue . well , we are always confronted with problems not of our own making . we do not make problems—[interruption . ] well , i hope we do not make problems , but we have to deal with them . in the case of the problems that have recently come before us — the injustice of the mineworkers ’ pension scheme , the injustice of freezing the pension rate for overseas pensioners , the horizon scandal , and the enormous question of the contaminated blood scandal — we are here to resolve those problems and secure justice for people who have suffered a grotesque injustice . people look to parliament to achieve that . we have the report , the information and the knowledge . we understand the injustice that has been done , the poverty that many people have been forced into and the insult when a person in their 60s finds that they can not access their pension and is told by a dwp job adviser to take an apprenticeship , which is ludicrous . they know full well that they are not going to get it . those people feel a sense of hurt . they believe that they did the right thing , and they believe that the government and the dwp have done the wrong thing by them . rebecca hilsenrath answered question 51 of the work and pensions committee ’s evidence session , on whether information should have been made better available , which obviously it should have been , by saying that services should be “ user - focused ” . she thought that the information system was poor , and that the advertising of it was poor . clearly many very well informed people were not aware of the dangerous situation they were moving into with their own personal finances . there is an opportunity to resolve this , and it could be resolved with a statement from the government today undertaking that , by what we need is justice , and it is up to this parliament to deliver that justice for women who worked so hard to deliver the services from which we have all benefited . we owe it to them , and we can do it now . it is a pleasure to follow my good friend and comrade , i congratulate my hon . friend i am getting good at the game of anticipating what is in the government ’s prepared text . we will no doubt be told that the pension changes were made for the great cause of equality — that if we punish people equally , it is a great stride towards equality . the simple and brutal dynamic is , however , that women born in the 1950s have been discriminated against throughout their life . it started with growing up and not having a cheque book or being able to hire a television unless they had the express permission of their father or husband . there was the expectation that if they fell pregnant , they were to leave their employment and give up their careers to raise children . as my hon . friend the discrimination against 1950s - born women has been going on for a long time . to say to those women with very little notice , as if it is an episode of “ who wants to be a millionaire ? ” , “ we do n’t want to give you that . we want you to work an additional six years in the name of equality , ” is frankly ludicrous . we need to recognise the injustices and discrimination that many 1950s - born women suffered throughout their life . we also need to recognise that this change was not about some magical equality formula ; it was to make women work longer . we need to have a serious debate about the huge difference between someone ’s working age expectancy and their life expectancy , because they are two entirely different things , particularly for women whose work involves hugely physical tasks , as in the care sector and the nhs . my hon . friend is making an important point . i want to go back to the cridland report ; i remember meeting cridland at the time . on the issue of healthy life expectancy , to be told that the dwp did not hold such information because that was the responsibility of the department of health and social care shows the dysfunctionality and the lack of concern about people ’s healthy life . my right hon . friend is right . i have always been told that there is joined - up government here—[interruption . ] well , i am often told that by members on the government benches , but all too often , hon . members on the opposition benches meet that with the surprised and quizzical look that i just got from my right hon . friend several hon . members , including my good friend i pay tribute to the waspi campaigners in glasgow and lanarkshire , particularly the great kathy mcdonald and rosie dickson , who have campaigned rigorously and vigorously over the last few years , including after the 2019 election , when many people thought that this issue was finished and was not getting anywhere . those waspi campaigners — the 1950s - born women who have campaigned consistently on this issue for the last five years in particular — should be commended in this house . this parliament has issues to grapple with . next week we will discuss the report on infected blood ; we will have a piece of legislation — rightly so — for the postmasters ; and we have the issue before us . i agree with everyone who has spoken so far that we need to conclude this matter before the summer recess , so that we can all say , as a parliament , that we know and accept the cost . then we can debate matters going forward . i am very clear about justice for the 1950s - born women , the infected blood community and the postmasters . those groups should not be blamed for a lack of investment in public infrastructure . the country badly needs those things , and we should not use those wonderful campaigners as an excuse . i mentioned the great rosie dickson . she contacted me earlier with a quote from one of my favourite political philosophers , the great jimmy reid , who hailed from govan , in my glasgow south west constituency . he said : “ from the very depth of my being , i challenge the right of any man or any group of men , in business or in government , to tell a fellow human being that he or she is expendable . ” the view of many 1950s - born women is that this government have viewed them as expendable . i want to send a clear message to the house on their behalf , as many of us have today , that they are not expendable . they deserve justice . if justice is delayed , the price tag will go up ; i hope the government recognise that . i hope the ministers will confirm today that we will see action and justice for those wonderful , brave 1950s - born women . i have lived this campaign for about 10 years , as have a number of other hon . members . today , we have heard unanimity from speakers from all political parties across the house . unless we can get some action quickly , i despair of what parliamentary procedure is left to us . i do not want to go back to swinging the mace about again , but something needs to happen fairly quickly because anger is building up , in the chamber , outside and among the waspi women . i do not share the view of some hon . members about the equalisation of pensions . i supported the equalisation of pensions , but not on the basis of the retirement age for women increasing . i thought we were entering a period when we would be reducing the age that men had to work until , so we would equalise pensions that way . the argument then was about whether the economy could afford it . the reason i was trying to equalise pensions by reducing men ’s working age was largely for working - class people . in many of our cities , the difference between the life expectancy of the rich and the poor is something like 20 years . we were told then that life expectancy would be continuously improving , but it has stagnated . many people do not work in a sedentary role , so as we increase the retirement age — it is now going up to 68 and beyond — they will work until they drop . that is not acceptable , particularly in the economy that we have , where we could redistribute wealth , lower people ’s retirement age and give them a decent pension . i was involved in designing the scheme proposed in 2019 . we commissioned lord bryn davies , who is one of the most respected pensions experts in the country , and worked for two years with waspi and the different groups to design the scheme . my commentary on the proposals by the ombudsman reflects some of the work that was done . we looked at a straightforward scheme . going into individual cases would take decades , to be frank , so we looked at a flat - rate scheme for everybody , based on an average loss of £ 100 a week . that resulted in an average payment of £ 15,000 , which is a lot of money . we costed it at more than £ 50 billion , which seemed a lot of money at the time , but it is less than a third of what the government saved by increasing the pension age for these women . in addition , we looked at different options : should we pay it over a four or five - year period and reduce the cost to £ 12 billion a year . when i said during the debate that this was a large amount of money , somebody said that we had just paid out £ 500 billion to bail out the banks when they had crippled the economy . then we went into 2020 and covid hit us . i also looked at what had been provided in tax cuts to some of the wealthiest in our country since 2010 . it was £ 100 billion . i looked at how much had been given in corporate welfare benefits , and , again , it was £ 100 billion . therefore , although it sounded like a lot of money at the time , in the context of fairness , it was the right amount . that is why the ombudsman ’s offer of between £ 3,000 and £ 10,000 is derisory ; it has to be more than that . the reason for having a flat - rate compensation scheme is for ease of administration , and i would recommend that wholeheartedly . we have heard today about the individual hardships that people have endured . we can not allow that to go on any further , which is why this scheme must be expedited . the ombudsman reports and is accountable to the public administration and constitutional affairs committee , on which i serve . we have considered each of the reports as they have come forward . we were critical about the delays that were taking place , so we impressed on the ombudsman the urgency of the situation . when we got the report back , we found that it had at least accepted that there had been an injustice and that there needed to be a compensation scheme . we waited with bated breath for the secretary of state to announce at least the timescale and the timetable for that compensation scheme , but all we heard was that the government would go away and consider it . that was weeks ago . pacac wrote to the secretary of state and asked for a timetable , stressing the urgency of the matter , because , exactly as members have said , people are dying . some people can not wait , because they either will literally not be here any more , or they are living in poverty and hardship . we received a reply this week . the secretary of state said that he would be bringing forward a statement “ in due course ” . what that means is nothing ; it is meaningless . as a committee , we have agreed to write again to say that that is unacceptable and that we need a clear timetable in which this matter will be addressed and proposals brought forward that we can vote on and , if necessary , amend in this house . if this parliament is sovereign and the government are accountable to this house , i believe that there is a majority , an overwhelming majority , of members who will vote for a compensation scheme that is readily accessible , and also at a level that reflects the hardship that people have suffered and the scale that most members would want to see . as we go into a general election , the issue will not go away . the waspi women and their campaign will not go away . people have expressed admiration for that campaign , which is not just impressive ; it is terrifying . unless a proposal is brought forward , it will become an election issue . i think people ’s votes will stand or fall in many constituencies on the basis of the decision coming out of all the political parties . voters will , however , blame the government the most , because there is an opportunity now , as others have said , to make a statement by the recess with a timetable for implementation . we could almost certainly agree the funding . we looked at how to raise the funds . some could be borrowing , but the government normally have contingencies for legal liabilities . this is a legal liability . we have the opportunity to act now , and i urge the government to wake up and listen to what the whole house is saying . if today ’s response is not satisfactory , we will be back next week , and if necessary every day until the recess until we get some sense out of the government . it is a pleasure , as ever , to follow another expert speech from the state pension is relied upon by more than 12 million of our citizens , and certainty about when they will be able to claim it is pivotal for many more who are planning retirement and making huge decisions based on that date . we now know that when changes to pensions impacting 1950s - born women were being implemented , those changes were not communicated properly . many received no direct communication at all . others found out what was to happen too late , having already made major decisions that they would not have made had they known the changes that were ahead . communicating changes to the state pension must be done well in advance , and using all means possible . that did not happen with the waspi women . that is the nub of what the ombudsman found , and it is what the government have to acknowledge . as the ombudsman said , an apology is due and compensation is owed . parliament has been asked to take the lead on this , and so the first and most important point that members have been making unanimously is that the government must hurry up and deliver . it has already been a long and arduous road to justice for the waspi women . it has taken far too long , and as has been noted , tragically too many will not get to the end of that road with us . once again , i pay tribute to my constituent june miller , a key figure in establishing our cumbernauld waspi group . it was an honour to work alongside her and the local team as they were establishing their campaign group , hosting public meetings and running waspi surgeries . june marched outside parliament with her waspi colleagues from across the uk in october 2018 . she made the case forcefully , eloquently and patiently — typical of the waspi campaign . it is heartbreaking that june is one of more than 280,000 waspi women to have died during the lifetime of the campaign . that is why the most important message that we are conveying today is that the government must move swiftly . the work and pensions committee is absolutely right : let us have proposals before the summer , and as has been said a couple of times , those proposals must be amenable to amendment by mps . it is parliament specifically that has been tasked with this , not just government ministers . as others have said , there is no excuse . the government should have seen this coming months and years ago . the big point of contention is clearly the level of compensation . while the ombudsman spoke of level 4 compensation , most of us know that that reflects only the handful of cases that the phso looked at , and almost certainly not the range of experiences faced by the waspi women as a whole . my view is that such a level of compensation feels significantly understated , and is not a fair reflection of the impact that the maladministration had on many of my constituents . i know that lots of hon . members feel the same way . i therefore join others in commending the work of the all - party parliamentary group , which has argued that fair compensation means level 6 compensation , because of the “ profound , devastating or irreversible impacts ” that the changes had . the point that that went way beyond a financial impact , and caused “ extraordinary emotional , physical and psychological distress ” is consistent with the experience of waspi women in cumbernauld , kilsyth and kirkintilloch east . i also think that there is considerable merit in a system that allows for higher payments for those who suffered the shortest notice and faced the longest delays until their state pension age . there will be waspi cases that have not been examined by the ombudsman where compensation for direct financial loss is absolutely appropriate , but again , speed is important . a general payment for lack of notice should not be delayed , but thereafter i do not see why claims for additional awards for direct loss could not also be proceeded with and considered . in that , there would be a parallel with the windrush scheme , where concerns about the slowness of decision making led to pressure from the home affairs committee for provisional or interim payments to claimants , which thankfully were implemented . it is possible to have speedy payments for all and thereafter to go on and have detailed consideration of individual claimants . another , perhaps even more important , lesson from windrush that i do not think has been mentioned in this debate is that surely it would be wise for the compensation scheme to be run independently of the dwp , and preferably independently of government altogether . that is surely sensible if people are to have faith in it , particularly when the department is proving so reluctant even to recognise that it has done anything wrong . the perception of a lack of independence certainly hindered the windrush compensation scheme and undermined people ’s confidence in coming forward to claim from it . we should learn a lesson from that . finally , on another day we will need to come back to the question of why it has taken so long to get here . i do not mean any of this as a criticism of the ombudsman or its staff ; it is more to do with the resources available to them and the parameters within which they have to work . however , whether with waspi , windrush , horizon , infected blood or any other recent scandal , time and again the mechanisms for putting right injustice and government maladministration seem to have been slow , and sometimes even more of a hindrance than a help . we need to revisit and overhaul how such failings are examined and remedied . as we have heard , justice delayed is justice denied , and that has certainly been the case for too many waspi women . in conclusion , our constituents are not asking for the earth — they never have been . they are quite realistic about what can and can not be done , and now they have the backing of the ombudsman . the government need to recognise , to apologise and to compensate , and more than anything they need to do so urgently . it is a pleasure to speak today on behalf of the waspi women . every right hon . and hon . member who has spoken in this debate has done so with a heartfelt desire on behalf of their constituents , and i wish to do the same . a lot has been said , but i want to offer a northern ireland perspective in the debate . it unites the voices of those in this chamber when we speak on behalf of all our constituents within the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland . in northern ireland there are some 77,000 waspi women — ladies who deserve to have their pension but have been denied it . tragically , many have passed away . in my strangford constituency we have approximately 5,000 who should qualify as waspi women . although i am the only northern ireland mp in the chamber now , i know that many of my colleagues from other parties have spoken on this issue . i had a well - attended debate on this debate is vital , but — and i say this almost as a question — is it necessary ? hon . members will say , “ what do you mean , is it necessary ? that ’s almost a contradiction . ” but it is not . the debate is not necessary : the problem is crystal clear and undisputed , at least by every person who has spoken . that being the case , we should recognise this and grant the compensation in a timely manner . that is what the debate is about . that is what we are asking for , and everyone from all political parties is united on that . we have the ombudsman ’s report . why , then , do we need to debate this issue again today , if the problem and the solution are clear and expected ? that is the way i see it . i congratulate i say this with great respect to the minister , who is an honest man and a gentleman , and who does his job well : the government are dragging their heels . as we have said on multiple occasions , each day that passes means that another lady has been wronged . my constituents and others are missing out not simply on justice — that is reason enough — but on the quality of life that should have been theirs . parties across the chamber have come together to reiterate that , but the power for change — and the reason change is not coming forward — lies with the government . that is the way i see it . on the many occasions i have spoken about the waspi ladies , i have given the example of a constituent of mine who was a school cleaner — everybody ’s constituencies had school cleaners like her . that lady cleaned the school toilets until she was 60 , with arthritis and pain . she spent most of her time on her knees . it is always good to spend time on your knees , as long as it is in prayer , but that lady spent her time on her knees on a floor with cold tiles , and she ended up with arthritis and pains . that is the issue . she focused on the end date when she could stop putting herself in pain and start enjoying her retirement without having to worry about turning her heating on because she could rely on her pension . that lady never had a sick day in 30 years — boy , what a record ! she turned up every day for 30 years to clean the toilets at the school . she deserves credit for that . we know that lady ’s generation well . there is no shame in it , but she felt shame about taking benefits , and she worked hard for the entitlement to a well - earned pension , which she thought she was getting . that pension was about nine months or a year ahead of her , when suddenly it turned out to be six years ahead of her . what — really ? there needs to be action . that was done to her without so much as a by your leave or a financial plan . i hear people saying , “ well , they knew about the plan , ” but many of my waspi women did not know at all . i can not remember which member said that 60 % of people did not know about their financial options . my constituent ’s option was to continue working on her knees , scrubbing , with tears in her eyes and in pain , which meant that she had to apply for sick pay . this government did that to her — and i say that with respect to the minister . that is the reason why it happened . the ombudsman said that it was not right to do that to my constituent , and that we should compensate that honourable lady and the 5,000 other waspi women in my constituency , as well as all those across this great united kingdom . we are no further forward in giving her that entitlement . meanwhile , those extra years of hard labour have taken their toll physically and emotionally . i genuinely have no words to say to that lady other than : “ i am sorry . i continually ask for compensation for you and the others . i am sorry that the government got it wrong . and i am sorry that it still is not rectified . ” i do not want to heap coals of fire upon the shoulders or the head of the minister , but the responsibility for this lies with the government . my words to the government are clear and direct , and i have plenty of them , but they can all be summed up in a few words : do the right thing , and do it now . that is my request . the government know their obligation , understand their duty , and accept the rationale behind that , so all we need now is the action to make this happen . we have seen how quickly compensation can be sorted , so why are we in this position where we are no further forward and doing the right thing seems not to be a priority ? it needs to be a priority — it needs to be a priority today , following this debate . it needs to be a priority before the summer recess , whenever that comes . that is the target date that i am asking the minister to aim for , because we need to give hope to our constituents and those waspi women who have resolutely , courageously , and in many cases physically , withstood the test of time . i believe that compensation should be granted in the form of a lump sum to help pay off any outstanding loans or debts , and there should then be an enhanced payment for a clear and set period of time . we have heard stories today of people who made their plans on the grounds of the pension plan that they had , only to find out that they had been disempowered , and all the plans they had made had to be scrapped . they lost their houses , their jobs and their health . what are we doing to help those people ? the hon . gentleman is making a sensitive and excellent speech . does he agree that this is not only about the loss of a pension from the age of 60 , the fact that people have not been able to plan and so forth ? for many women , their occupational pension will have been tied to the date of their retirement or their state pension — it varies a lot , depending on what the pension scheme is . some women have lost thousands upon thousands of pounds as a result of this decision . i thank the hon . lady for that intervention . the occupational pension is another factor ; it is incorporated in the plan that these people have made for their future . it is wonderful how you make a plan for the future and then the government scupper it on you ! all of a sudden , these ladies have found themselves in difficult circumstances , so i believe it is necessary to have a compensation scheme in place to help all of those ladies . i will conclude with one more comment , ever mindful of the time limit that we all indicated we would keep to . i understand the magnitude of such a scheme , but we were able to get support quickly to households across the uk for cost of living and energy payments — something that i commend the government on . that can be done on many occasions ; we just need the commitment to make it happen . i know that the government have the ability and the capacity to roll out all these schemes , so along with almost every other colleague in this house today , i sincerely ask that we prioritise finding a compensation formula and rolling it out . these women , our constituents — brave , courageous women — deserve no less , and we must ensure that we give them no less . i call the snp spokesman . it is a pleasure to follow there is a back - bench consensus today that the government have dragged their heels , that a response is now long overdue , and that compensation is due . we have also disproved the nonsense that women should have known about the increases in their state pension age . financial advisers and lawyers did not even know : as my hon . friend some labour back benchers today have rightly criticised the government for their lack of action and for their policies elsewhere , but then somehow bristled at snp speakers calling out the silence of their own front benchers . we are willing to work cross - party , but we also need pressure for action . if we do not call out what we think is wrongdoing , we are not doing the right thing for the waspi women who we are all here to represent today . we would not be in this chamber today , debating this issue as parliamentarians , if not for fantastic campaigners such as ayrshire waspi group , cunninghame waspi group , waspi in my constituency , waspi scotland , and of course the wider waspi organisation . i pay tribute to my constituent ann hammell , who brought the issue to my attention in my early period as an mp in 2015 . again , it was heartening to hear so many mps commend their own local campaigners . turning to the ombudsman ’s report , there are a few key aspects : the findings and confirmation of maladministration in the dwp , compensation to be paid , and government failures . i will explore each in turn . the ombudsman has not only confirmed that it believes that the dwp is guilty of maladministration , but has expressed outright anger at the belligerence of the department and , by default , this tory government . i welcome the robust comments of the ombudsman ’s chief executive , rebecca hilsenrath , who has stated : “ the uk ’s national ombudsman has made a finding of failings by dwp in this case and has ruled that the women affected are owed compensation . dwp has clearly indicated that it will refuse to comply . this is unacceptable . ” i agree with her . it beggars belief that , in 2024 , the government are suddenly pretending that this ombudsman ’s report is a bolt out of the blue and very complex . it is three years since the ombudsman found that the dwp was guilty of maladministration because of its lack of communication about increasing the state pension age . it is scandalous that the ombudsman is actually having to ask parliament to find a way to create a mechanism to provide compensation for those affected . if the ombudsman does not trust the uk government to do the right thing , i do not trust them either . unfortunately , at the moment i also do not trust the official opposition , who have been too quiet on the report findings to date . that is why i have brought forward my private member ’s bill , the state pension age ( compensation ) bill , which sets out a compensation framework . we need to remember that the prime minister was the chancellor who boasted about setting up the furlough scheme in a couple of weeks for the covid lockdown . clearly , if there is a government will , there is a way , so why do the government not have the will to get on with a compensation scheme for the waspi women ? in the ombudsman ’s report , compensation is unfortunately set at just level 4 , which feels wrong . for the majority of the 3.8 million women affected , it feels like a smack in the face . compensation of between £ 1,000 and £ 2,950 is an inadequate maximum payout . the waspi appg recommended level 6 for the worst affected , and my private member ’s bill takes a similar approach . i have suggested a framework that follows the clear logic that those affected by the biggest increase in state pension age , while in effect having the shortest notice period , should receive the most compensation . as for the 2.5 million women who have had to wait five years or more to access their pension , it would be absurd to award them just level 4 compensation of less than £ 3,000 . in my framework , they would be allocated compensation at phso level 6 , which is about £ 10,000 . those who have not had to wait quite as long , but who were still badly affected in some cases , will get levels 4 and 5 , with a minority on lower levels . i thank members from across the house who have signed my private member ’s bill . this subject has been debated in parliament for nine years , and for over nine years these women and their families have been fighting for justice . it is tragic that , as has been repeated many times , the women are dying at a rate of 40,000 a year , or one waspi woman every 13 minutes , and they are not getting the justice they deserve . this underlines that it is critical that parliament takes action now . however , there has not even been a suggestion on the way forward from the official opposition . they should be putting proposals to the government , and saying what they would do if they were in government . if their solution was accepted by the government , they could then claim credit for getting compensation over the line . instead , we have heard nothing from the opposition — zip — apart from weasel words about listening . i hope the shadow minister , as i say , i hope the shadow minister will bring forward proposals , but i would like her and the minister responding to the debate to consider the constituents ’ stories we have heard today , and a few of mine as well . lynn was exhausted after working for 34 years in the nhs and agreed to take early retirement at 55 , but she found out on her last day of work that it would be 11 years before she got the state pension , not the five years she anticipated . nancy was widowed at the age of 54 , while she was working part time , which was clearly traumatic emotionally and financially . she has suffered umpteen chronic health conditions while caring for her parents , but was forced to take nhs bank work just to survive . lesley , who has sometimes worked three jobs to make ends meet , was a carer for her partner when he had cancer , a carer for her dad when he had cancer , and had a period of travelling to southampton every weekend to visit her aunt — superwoman efforts that would exhaust anybody . it is little wonder that she took early retirement age 56 , only to discover later that she had to wait six years longer than she thought to access her pension . do not dare tell those women and others like them that they need to wait longer for justice . these are women who did not have maternity rights back in the day . they were paid less than men , and were more likely to work part time , and their private pensions were smaller , if they had them . in reality , pension age equalisation has further disadvantaged those women , especially as they were told that to get a full pension , they had to pay extra ni contributions . it is time that the right thing was done , and that right thing is fair and fast compensation now . i call the shadow minister . i , too , thank the backbench business committee for making time for this important debate from the limited time that it has to allocate . i have listened carefully to every contribution . a number of members , including my hon . friend other members described the detail of the ombudsman ’s report , and the possibilities for redress , including the hon . members for waveney ( peter aldous ) , for north norfolk ( duncan baker ) , for south west bedfordshire ( andrew selous ) , for north east fife ( wendy chamberlain ) , and for cumbernauld , kilsyth and kirkintilloch east ( stuart c. mcdonald ) , and my right hon . friends the members for knowsley ( sir george howarth ) , and for east ham ( sir stephen timms ) , who chairs the work and pensions committee . we have had a thorough and extensive debate this afternoon . i recognise and pay tribute to the women who have joined us today , or who have watched the debate from afar . as i say , it has been a full discussion . the ombudsman ’s report is important and has serious lessons for the government . it also relates the serious consequences for the women who experienced the events that it describes . the ombudsman has rightly said that it is for the government to respond , and that parliament should consider the report ’s findings . as we have heard , the work and pensions committee has begun that process , and will hear from ministers next week , i believe . i will follow those proceedings carefully . in march , the secretary of state said in this chamber that he would proceed “ without undue delay ” , and on monday he said that he still required an appropriate amount of time to consider the ombudsman ’s conclusion . my first question is about time . for all the reasons that members have set out , it would be helpful if the minister set out a timescale , and told us , crucially , what advice has been provided to the government , and what analysis is under way in the department . it would be helpful to know what the process is . in the absence of that further update from the government , labour ’s position remains the same as it was when the ombudsman ’s report was published . we are all waiting for the government to respond , so i will not diverge from what my hon . friend and colleague issues around changes to the state pension have spanned multiple parliaments , but i remind everybody that the moment that sparked the women against state pension inequality campaign was the pensions act 2011 , in which the then chancellor , george osborne , decided to accelerate state pension age increases with very little notice — a time described accurately by the right hon . member for ross , skye and lochaber . george osborne ’s comment that that “ probably saved more money than anything else we ’ve done ” made me angry at the time , as i imagine it angered many other women . during that period , labour tabled amendments that would have ensured that proper notice was given , so that women could plan for their retirement . that would have gone some way to dealing with the problem . have the government , even now , done an analysis of why they pressed ahead with the changes , despite the clear consequences ? in any case , the ombudsman began investigating how changes to the state pension age were communicated in 2019 . that year , the high court ruled that the ombudsman could not recommend changes to the state pension itself , or the reimbursement of lost pensions , because those issues had been decided on by parliament , as many members have mentioned . the ombudsman ’s report states that internal research from dwp in 2004 found that about 40 % of the women affected knew about the changes to the state pension age . is that still the government ’s assessment , now that the report has been published , or are they looking for other evidence ? what is their assessment of the total number of women who would receive compensation under the different options put forward by the ombudsman ? how many of them are the poorest pensioners , and how many of them are on pension credit ? how many of those affected have already retired or sadly passed away ? given that the government knew , as members have described , that there were problems communicating the changes to the state pension age , i wonder about that moment in 2011 , and precisely what advice was provided to ministers at the time . let us think about the principle here . the government are committed to providing 10 years ’ notice of future changes to the state pension age . in 2015 , the pensions commission found that that should be 15 years ’ notice . it is important for the government to state why there is that difference . we all want a result of this debate to be a guarantee that information about any future changes to the state pension age will be timely and helpful for the individuals affected . we have problems with the pensions dashboards . what is going on with pensions information ? crucially , will the response to the ombudsman ’s report , when it comes , contain a list of the lessons that the department is learning , and measures that it is putting in place ? the ombudsman took the rare decision to ask parliament to intervene on this issue because it had doubts , as many members have described , about whether the department would provide a remedy . in the light of those concerns , and to aid parliament with its work , i ask again , as we did previously , for the government to commit to laying out all relevant information , and placing it in the library . i have some experience of dealing with historical injustices , and i must impress on the minister that my experience from dealing with the hillsborough disaster is that open access to the evidence is extremely important . i hope that , in the spirit of the hillsborough law , the government will come forward and put that information before us , so that we can see it . i look forward to hearing what the minister has to say . i do not imagine that we will get a response today to the ombudsman ’s report , but will he at least set out the timetable for a response , because we can not move on until we have that ? i hope that the women affected by all these changes — including those changes expedited in 2011 — who were born just after the second world war can soon hear the government ’s response . as many have mentioned , they were born long before a woman ’s place at work , and women ’s full rights to their own earnings and pensions , were secured . this place has always been slow when it comes to women ’s rights . in 1951 , more than 30 years after women could first come here , just 17 of 650 mps were women , yet women of that generation built the platform that we all stand on . they fought to change things for women , and the least they deserve is a response from the government to the ombudsman ’s report . it is a pleasure to serve under your chairmanship , madam deputy speaker . i am grateful to the backbench business committee for finding the time to host the debate . we have heard from members on both sides of the house and from across the whole country , who have spoken both eloquently and passionately on behalf of their constituents . i know that many in the public gallery , as well as those listening remotely , who will be taking a close , scrutinising interest in this matter . i am always conscious that it is on behalf of those women that we are deliberating . i pay tribute to those in my own constituency who have campaigned long and hard and met me down the years , even in recent weeks . i readily acknowledge the strength of feeling on both sides of the house . the government are listening . what colleagues have had to say during the debate , which i have heard , will be taken fully into consideration . in the oral statement made to the house on “ update to the house once we have considered the report ’s findings . ”—[official report , i understand the wide interest in this matter across the chamber . we are all united in wanting a resolution . the ombudsman ’s investigation has taken five years and produced a substantial report that requires careful and considered scrutiny . it is only right that we should give it that scrutiny . the government are giving full and proper consideration to the ombudsman ’s report , and that work is ongoing . the issues to be decided are significant and complex and require detailed understanding and deliberation . i would like to remind the house of the government ’s strong track record of supporting pensioners . in 2024 - 25 , we will spend more than £ 167 billion on benefits for pensioners . that is 6 % of gdp and includes spending on the state pension , which is forecast to be about £ 138 billion in 2024 - 25 . we are honouring the triple lock , having increased the basic and new state pensions by 8.5 % in april . in 2024 - 25 , the full yearly amount of the basic state pension will be £ 3,700 higher in cash terms than it was in 2010 . we now have 200,000 fewer pensioners in absolute poverty after housing costs . i am grateful to the minister for sharing those figures . i am aware that people are a bit sceptical about statistics — someone said in the select committee the other day that 83.6 % of all statistics were made up ; i am not sure if that is true . can i just advise the minister of this ? we have the poorest pensioners in europe . just 5.7 % of our uk gdp is spent on state pensions and pensions benefits , compared with 16 % in italy , 13.9 % in france , 11.9 % in spain , and an oecd average of 8.2 % . his suggestion that our pensioners are generously provided for does not stand up to scrutiny . i am grateful for that contribution . i heard the hon . gentleman make those comments in his speech as well . i am trying to remember the precise figures , but i can not , so i will write to him . more generally — this point is often made to me by pension experts — the international numbers are not directly comparable because each welfare system is entirely different , particularly in the public - private split in how pension systems are funded . to say that one percentage is generous while another percentage is not generous is not quite the point . i shall write to him none the less , because i think that he will find the fine print useful for his future contributions . the minister said that the government are to give the ombudsman ’s report serious consideration before they decide what to do . how long does he think that process will take ? if i may , i will answer that in a moment , because i will now turn back to the report . in laying the report before parliament , the ombudsman brought matters to the house ’s attention , making it clear that parliament has a role in responding to the report . the government intend to engage fully and constructively with parliament . i view this debate as a crucial part of that process . i remind the house about what the ombudsman ’s report says — and indeed does not say . the ombudsman has looked not at the decision to equalise the state pension age but rather at how that decision was communicated by the dwp . that is important to understand , as the motion calls on the government to “ deliver prompt compensation to women born in the 1950s who had their state pension age raised . ” importantly , the ombudsman ’s report hinges on the department ’s decisions over a narrow period between 2005 and 2007 , and their effect on individual notifications . the ombudsman has not found that women have directly lost out financially as a result dwp actions . the report stated : “ we do not find that it ” — the dwp ’s communication — “ resulted in them suffering direct financial loss . ” the final report does not say that all women born in the 1950s will have been adversely impacted , as many women were aware that the state pension age had changed . the stage 1 report found that between 1995 and 2004 , the dwp ’s communication of changes to the state pension age reflected the standards that the ombudsman would expect it to meet . that report also confirmed that accurate information about changes to the state pension age was publicly available in leaflets , through the dwp pension education campaigns and dwp agencies and on its website . however , when considering the department ’s actions between august 2005 and december 2007 , the ombudsman came to the view that they resulted in 1950s - born women receiving individual notice later than they might have done had different decisions been made . i welcome the wide - ranging contributions from members on behalf of their constituents . the ombudsman clearly said that the dwp was guilty of maladministration during the period of 2005 to 2007 . does the minister accept the finding that the dwp was guilty of maladministration , and should put its hands up to that ? i recognise that there will be an appetite from some opposition members for the government to respond item by item to different parts of the ombudsman ’s report , but the government wish to respond in full when they have reached a conclusion from their deliberations . i will not go down the path that the hon . gentleman seeks to take me along . some of the detailed commentary from members today illustrates the interlocking considerations at play , depending on how each member of parliament responds to the report . the fact that so many have spoken today demonstrates the importance of this issue . many parliamentary activities are worth noting to understand how they fit in . the chair of the work and pensions committee , late last month i was able to meet let me come to the question from it was about the draft report , but i am grateful for that clarity . members raised questions about changes to the state pension age . as i said , the ombudsman ’s report is clear that it can not consider the impact of changes in the law on state pension age . the changes are set out in primary legislation and , as such , were agreed by parliament . the announcement in 1993 of the equalisation of the state pension age addressed a long - standing inequality between men and women . the changes were also about maintaining the right balance between the sustainability of the state pension , fairness between generations and ensuring a dignified retirement . changes to the state pension age were made in a series of acts by successive governments from 1995 onwards , following public consultations and extensive debates in both houses of parliament . from the 1940s until april 2010 , the state pension age was 60 for women and 65 for men . the decision to equalise the state pension age for men and women dates back to 1995 . it was right to address a long - standing inequality between men ’s and women ’s state pension age . the report of the pensions commission in 2005 recommended that the state pension age should increase in a staged way to 68 in the three decades following the completion of equalisation in 2020 . a broad consensus on that was achieved largely due to the commission ’s evidence base , which showed that state pension age should follow increases in life expectancy to help ensure the affordability and sustainability of the state pension . legislation passed in 2007 introduced a series of increases , starting with a state pension age of 66 between 2024 and 2026 , and ending with an increase to 68 between 2044 and 2046 . as has been observed , the pensions act 2011 accelerated the equalisation of women ’s state pension age by 18 months and brought forward the increase in men ’s and women ’s state pension age to 66 by five and a half years , relative to the previous timetables . the changes in the 2011 act occurred following a public call for evidence and extensive debates in parliament . during the passage of the act , parliament legislated for a concession worth £ 1.1 billion . the concession reduced the proposed increase in state pension age for more than 450,000 men and women , and meant that no woman saw their state pension age change by more than 18 months relative to the timetable set by the pensions act 1995 . will the minister give way ? sorry , i wo n’t . during the course of the ombudsman ’s investigation , state pension age changes were considered by the courts . in 2019 and 2020 , the high court and court of appeal respectively found no fault with the actions of dwp . the courts made clear that under successive governments dating back to 1995 , the action taken was entirely lawful and did not discriminate on any grounds . during those proceedings , the court of appeal held that the high court was entitled to conclude as a fact that there had been “ adequate and reasonable notification given by the publicity campaigns implemented by the department over a number of years ” . we recognise the importance of providing information in good time about the state pension age to help individuals to plan for their retirement . since 1995 , the government have used a range of methods to inform people about the increases in state pension age , including the provision of detailed and personalised information . the methods have included leaflets explaining the legislative changes , pensions education campaigns , press advertising and direct mailing exercises to millions of people . people have been able to request personalised state pension information since the 1980s . we do not know the timing of the general election — possibly november , but maybe later — but it is likely that we will have only about 10 sitting weeks between now and a general election . can i impress on the minister to take back to his fellow ministers that we need the proposals rapidly in those 10 weeks , and certainly before recess , if we are to get a viable scheme through parliament ? i am happy to confirm that i will take that message back . i have heard it clearly today . i understand the points about the work and pensions committee ’s findings , too . the right hon . gentleman will have heard the secretary of state — and me , in oral questions on monday — say that we wish to have no undue delay . that remains the case . i recognise that people are frustrated by that phrase , but it is an accurate phrase . we do not wish undue delay . as i keep saying , it is a complex issue . it is not just a matter of ticking a box . it needs to be gotten right , and we understand all the ramifications and options that are open to us . between april 2000 and february 2021 , the dwp provided more than 41.2 million personalised state pension statements , and it continues to do so . as well as issuing letters to the 6.9 million women and men born in the 1950s notifying them of the state pension age increase , the dwp sent around 17.8 million automatic state pension forecasts between 2003 and 2006 , which included a leaflet explaining that the state pension age for women was increasing . as i have outlined , the government recognise the importance of this issue . the ombudsman report has been laid before parliament , and we have been invited to take a view and engage with this issue . today is one part of that . we will listen to the views of the house with great seriousness . the report is currently being given active and extensive consideration within the department , by me and by the secretary of state . we will seek to provide a further update without , as i say , undue delay , and i hope to give the issue the airing that it deserves as soon as that is practically possible . let me end the debate by making a few observations . the motion garnered unanimous support from back - bench speakers , which expressed the will of the house , but unfortunately the contributions from the labour and government front benches did not reflect that cross - party consensus . justice is too important to be denied for fear of the price tag . i remind the house that the parliamentary and health service ombudsman concluded that ignoring the findings of the report would create an unprecedented constitutional gap in the protection of the rights of citizens who had been failed by a public body in respect of ensuring access to justice . that constitutional gap presents a danger to our very democracy . what we have seen today is an apparent refusal from the government front bench to accept the report ’s findings , while , disappointingly , the labour front bench continues to refuse to make any commitment to the waspi women . that is why labour members of the scottish parliament were ordered to abstain on calls for compensation last week . i note that the tone of the response from the labour front bench to this crisis — for it is a crisis — is entirely different from the tone of labour front benchers when they speak of the infected blood scandal and the horizon calamity . it is disappointing that the uk government ’s response takes us no further forward , and it is disappointing that the same applies to the labour front bench . we have heard about considering , engaging , reflecting ; what we have not heard about is any action , or any timeframe for action . it seems that the cosy , “ do nothing ” consensus between the front benches continues , which means that the campaign for justice for waspi women — despite being vindicated by the ombudsman — must also continue . question put and agreed to . resolved , that this house notes the findings of the parliamentary and health service ombudsman report on women ’s state pension age ; and calls on the government to deliver prompt compensation to women born in the 1950s who had their state pension age raised . i rise to present a petition on behalf of those in my constituency who have been affected by the contaminated blood scandal , including my constituent neil brown , who has sadly died while waiting for justice . i want to pay tribute to all campaigners , including , of course , my right hon . friend “ the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to implement the recommendations in the second interim report of the infected blood inquiry without delay . ” following is the full text of the petition : [ the petition of residents of the constituency of the city of chester , declares that people who received infected blood and who have suffered as a consequence have , along with their families , waited for too long for redress . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to implement the recommendations in the second interim report of the infected blood inquiry without delay . and the petitioners remain , etc . ] [ p002990 ] i also rise to present a petition on behalf of my constituents , which calls for the implementation of the recommendations of the second interim report of the infected blood inquiry — in particular , the payment of interim compensation to those who have been infected and affected , whose families have suffered enough . the petition states : the petition of residents of the constituency of oldham east and saddleworth , declares that people who received infected blood and who have suffered as a consequence have , along with their families , waited for too long for redress . the petitioners therefore request that the house of commons urges the government to implement the recommendations in the second interim report of the infected blood inquiry without delay . and the petitioners remain , etc . [ p002982 ] motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(scott mann . ) we have seen many injustices debated in this house . just today , we have seen the injustice of the waspi women . in recent weeks , we have spoken about the infected blood scandal and , more recently , the post office scandal . tonight , we are going to debate another scandal : the mineworkers ’ pension scheme scandal . some 25 % of the united kingdom is on top of old coalmines , so i had hoped that 25 % of this chamber would be full tonight , but it is not . maybe there are a few reasons for that . the issue has been debated a lot in this place , both before and since i came into parliament , so maybe certain mps are getting a bit fed up of saying the same old thing , but we will keep trying . i started in the pits in the mid-1980s . i went to work at sutton colliery , in north nottinghamshire , with my dad paul anderson . he was a rope fitter , and i went to work with him underground . i had a good time working with my dad and my friends at sutton colliery , which was a family pit . it was a small coalmine with small coal seams and difficult conditions . it was a family pit where brothers worked with their brothers , dads and grandads . it was a proper community , but like all coalmines , there was tragedy underground . at sutton colliery in 1957 , there was a methane explosion and , sadly , five men lost their lives . i knew some of the friends , families and descendants of the people who died . i then went on to cresswell colliery , in north derbyshire , to do my coalface training . it was another family pit where , again , men worked with their sons , and brothers worked with their brothers , and it too was tinged with tragedy . in 1950 , there was a fire at cresswell colliery and , sadly , 83 men and boys lost their lives . the mine rescuers had to seal the pit off underground to save the colliery , so that it could produce coal again . they sealed off some of the old workings and left the men inbye , because there was no chance of saving them , but when they took the stops down just a few months later , the men were on the other side . some of them had scratched their names into the wall . it was terrible , and this sort of thing is hard to explain to people who have not worked down a coalmine . it was a very tight - knit community , and people worked in difficult conditions . i had just over 10 years of working in awful conditions , but my grandad charlie had 45 years down the coalmine and finished up at new hucknall colliery . it would have been 50 years , but he took a break between 1940 and 1945 , and went to fight hitler . then he came back and went straight back down the pit the following week . when he finished in the pits in 1979 , he got a tankard , a certificate , 500 quid and a meagre pension — imagine that . as miners , we knew about the risks underground when we went down the pit every day . since mining started in this country in the 1600s , over 160,000 men , women and children have died in the coalmines , so we knew the risks . we knew there was always a chance that something might happen , but these were the risks we took . the miners took these risks for simple reasons : to earn a wage , put food on the table and make sure their kids were well dressed . in 1994 , when i was still working in the pits , they were privatised . in my area , it was rj budge mining that took over the pits . at that time , a big bone of contention was what was going to happen with the mps , or the mineworkers ’ pension scheme . it was probably one of the richest pension schemes in the world at that time , and was worth hundreds of millions , if not billions , in today ’s money . it was always accepted that there would be a 70:30 split in favour of the miners . when the then government sat around the table with the trustees to make an offer to guarantee the mineworkers ’ pension scheme , we automatically surmised that there would be a 70:30 split , which would have been fair . but at the last minute , it ended up being — and depending on who you talk to , whether it is the trustees at the time or the mining organisations involved in campaigning , nobody can get to the bottom of it — a “ take it or leave it ” 50:50 deal . the government at the time never undertook a proper financial risk assessment or had actuarial advice on the split . we can never get to the bottom of that — it was a simple “ take it or leave it . ” when i was working at the pit with my friends , we never really had a say in this . i can not remember any man i worked with underground being happy with the 50:50 split , because we knew how rich the pension fund was . thirty years on from 1994 , successive labour and conservative governments have not paid a single penny into the pension scheme , which is a cash cow . they have taken £ 4.8 billion out of the scheme . some mining groups say the sum is nearer to £ 10 billion , but i will take the figure i have here . in just the last three years , the government have taken more than £ 400 million out of the surplus , which is a lot of money . this is miners ’ money . in effect , the treasury ’s guarantee is an insurance scheme . it guarantees to make up the shortfall and pay the bonuses , and so on , if there is not a surplus , but i can not think of any insurance scheme anywhere in this country , or the world , that has never had to pay out . in 30 years , not a penny has come from the treasury or the taxpayer to top up the mineworkers ’ pension scheme . i think that is a bit of a scandal , and so does my mining community . i think we all agree . we had a three - hour debate in this chamber last thursday , in which over 30 members contributed , and i think there was unanimity on the unfairness and injustice of the surplus - sharing arrangement . when the hon . gentleman was deputy chairman of the conservative party , the former prime minister , boris johnson , visited the coalfield in mansfield and gave certain undertakings and assurances to reform the surplus - sharing arrangement so that the miners would get their money back . as a former deputy chairman of the conservative party , is the hon . gentleman aware of any discussions after the 2019 general election on implementing those promises ? when i was deputy chairman of the conservative party , and even before that , i spoke to the current prime minister , who was then chancellor of the exchequer , and , to be fair , he looked into the scheme and the surplus arrangement . one discussion at the time was that perhaps the whole pension scheme could be given back to the miners , with the government not acting as a guarantor at all . i would have hoped that we could come together a little in this debate and not try to score political points . i am here for my community of mineworkers , for my dad , for my brother - in - law and for the people of ashfield who toiled underground . i will not get involved in silly , petty politics in this debate . the 1980s and ’ 90s were difficult times for the mining community . pits were closing , people were losing their jobs and men were out of work , and we saw the injustice of this surplus arrangement with the government of the day . there were other people trying to rip off the miners . these were the spivs , the financial advisers , who rocked up in their new rovers . they were calling in at miners ’ welfare clubs and working men ’s clubs , knocking on doors and turning up . these men in shiny suits had never done a day ’s work in their life , and they were conning the miners — my dad was one of them — by telling them that the mineworkers ’ pension was no good and was not making money . the miners transferred their money to these private pension schemes , and they were ripped off . fortunately , just a few years later , many of these miners , including my dad , were able to claim compensation against these sharks and put their money back in the mps , which is probably one of the best pension schemes in the world . we talk a lot in this place about levelling up and , back in 2019 , i stood on a manifesto of levelling up . to be fair to the government , ashfield has had lots of money , about £ 200 million . we have had two new school rebuilds , nearly £ 100 million in future high streets funding and towns funding , and extra money for police and cctv , for which i am incredibly grateful to the government , but real levelling up puts more money into people ’s pockets and lets them decide how to spend it . i can not think of a fairer way of levelling up than giving these miners , their widows and their families a little more money in their pocket . i know what a great champion the hon . gentleman has been for his community and the rest of nottinghamshire , and indeed nationally , on this issue . i was in many of the meetings that he described earlier , such as with the prime minister when he was chancellor and with other ministers . the hon . gentleman was a miner in manton in my constituency ; he has shown me his lamp many times and told me many stories . motion lapsed ( motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(scott mann . ) i want to make a point about the split and the surplus . does the hon . gentleman share my frustration about that ? at times we have believed that some real progress has been made , whether on the split or the surplus , and there has been a chance to renegotiate — to get some incremental progress to put some money back into the pockets of those widows and to make that change over time . we could have been in a better position now if not for those who really did not want to negotiate and who wanted all or nothing immediately . the hon . gentleman makes some reasonable points . to be fair , the guarantee scheme has worked in that the government have been able to take more risks with the pension fund and it has created a higher yield . the problem that i have faced as a member of parliament dealing with certain groups is that i can not get the groups to agree on the best solution or the best way forward . that is incredibly frustrating . there is still a lot of bitterness , even 40 years on from the miners ’ strikes . i come from a family who were on strike — all my family were striking miners — but there is still a bitterness now when i get involved . when i met some of the mining groups , they said , “ keep your nose out . we do n’t want scabs getting involved in our business , ” because i come from nottinghamshire . that is not the way forward . we have to have a sensible debate , like grown - ups . thousands of ex - miners are dying each year . the pension fund is probably worth £ 12 billion , £ 13 billion or £ 14 billion , so it is a massive pot of money . when the last miner dies — i am 57 , so i am probably one of the last miners and one of the youngest ex - miners left — all the money left in the scheme will go to the treasury . we could give the miners a much fairer deal and a fairer split , and we could carry out the recommendations of the 2021 business , energy and industrial strategy committee ’s report to give the miners that money , because it will not cost the government anything . in 50 years , they will get a pension pot worth billions of pounds . as i said , the way to level up in deprived areas such as mine that have suffered job losses , have been deskilled and have gone through the mill over the past 30 or 40 years , is to give the miners and their families a bit more money . i feel incredibly proud to stand here and represent the people of ashfield and the mining community of ashfield — the widows and ex - miners , some of whom are friends i used to work down the pit with . all we want from the government is a bit of justice . we are not asking for much ; we are asking for a bit more money for the miners and their families in this great country of ours before the last miner dies . i am incredibly grateful to speak in the debate , which is the second on miners ’ pensions in a week — we had a good debate about miners and mining communities last week . i am grateful to in barnsley , 30,000 men worked down the pit . our community was built on coal and it powered a nation . it is 40 years since thousands of men were forced to go out on strike to defend their industry — a battle that sadly they lost . it is simply not right that , decades later , they are still fighting for their pension . in 2021 i was pleased to campaign for , and secure , the beis committee report into the mineworkers ’ pension scheme . it was a cross - party report and it very clearly concluded that the government should not be in the business of profiting from miners ’ pensions . some £ 4.8 billion has been taken by the government to date . that has risen by £ 400 million since that report . the average miner is on a pension of just £ 84 a week , and widows are on a lot less . i met a man in my constituency a few weeks ago on £ 1 a week . i have raised this issue in this place dozens of times . i have met with ministers and shadow ministers . i went to the treasury a few weeks ago to make the case again . i could not be clearer about my commitment to the issue . indeed , i will continue to advocate not just on miners ’ pensions but on miners ’ health and support for our coalfield communities more broadly . my constituency of barnsley east is yet to receive any levelling - up funding . in 2006 , 280,000 miners were in the scheme . the government financial risk to the scheme is in permanent decline , yet it is costing the same as it did 25 years ago . that deal was done without any actuarial advice , as the government admitted to me some years ago in answer to a written parliamentary question . i held the last adjournment debate on this subject in 2019 . in that debate , i spoke about how 160,000 men claimed a miners ’ pension . today , that figure is sadly less than 125,000 . we need justice for the miners before it is too late . it is a pleasure to serve under your chairmanship , madam deputy speaker . i pay tribute to while i am only freshly returned as a minister , in the whirlwind of a mere three weeks i have been lobbied by many people on the subject , including my hon . friends the members for bolsover ( mark fletcher ) , for mansfield ( ben bradley ) , for bassetlaw ( brendan clarke - smith ) and for sedgefield ( paul howell ) , and i thank the minister for giving way ; he is being very generous , which is completely in character . i do not think any of us wants a pat on the back . what we want is the issue resolved . in common with the previous debate about the women against state pension inequality campaign , the issue is the age demographic . my poor mother is 88 . many miners and their widows are coming to the end . we need to resolve this in the interests of justice , and the beis committee ’s report from as i said , i recognise the strength of feeling and i want to set out the government ’s position on where there are opportunities to look further . it is right that we acknowledge the hard work of coalminers over decades and their contribution to national prosperity , which is exactly what the hon . member for ashfield did so well . since privatisation , the government have recognised the need to support former coalfield areas through initiatives such as the coalfield regeneration trust . over the past 25 years , successive governments have invested over £ 1 billion in former coalfield areas . the uk government are committed to levelling up across the whole of the united kingdom to ensure that no community is left behind and investing in places that need it most , including former coalfield communities . i again credit the hon . member for ashfield on how hard he worked to secure the significant levelling - up funds that have reached his constituency . i am grateful to the minister for giving way again — i do not mean to be a nuisance , i promise . it is all very well for ashfield , which has had £ 200 million or £ 300 million . easington has had nothing . my community of horden , which bid for levelling - up funding , is in the top 1 % most deprived communities in the country . i hope the minister is not suggesting that £ 4.8 billion of the miners ’ money can legitimately be used by the government for other purposes , such as regeneration in coalfield or other areas . that is their money . if the reserve investment fund alone was redistributed , it would give them almost £ 900 a month directly in their pockets . i can confirm that the hon . member is never a nuisance , but , again , i would reflect on the ability to lobby and secure levelling - up funds , and those who do well are directly benefiting their communities . specifically , this involves a range of projects , including the £ 20 million to deliver two capital regeneration projects that will revitalise town centres , including in ashfield . the coal authority has been working with public and private sector partners for a number of years to develop the use of heat in water contained in the former coal mining infrastructure as a resource for heat networks and large space heating . current schemes are heating multiple homes and businesses at discounts of at least 5 % below prevailing market rates for heat . the coal authority estimates that 25 % of properties are located on former coal mining areas . mine water heat can offer a homegrown and sustainable source of heat , boost local economies and also create more local green jobs . the government ’s commitment to mining communities is also demonstrated through the continued guarantee given to the mineworkers ’ pension scheme . the scheme remains a significant undertaking . it has more than 130,000 members , pays pensions at an annual cost of over £ 600 million and has assets in excess of £ 7 billion . the scheme is managed by the trustees ; the government ’s role is as guarantor . my officials meet the trustees to discuss the operation of the scheme regularly . when the scheme was set up in 1952 , members contributed no more than 20p per week , and benefits were relatively small . from 1975 , contributions and benefits were linked to members ’ salaries and british coal made up the difference . at privatisation , the government took on the guarantor role previously played by british coal . the scheme had a surplus in 1994 , and 50 % of this surplus was used to enhance members ’ pensions immediately — that is an interesting chronology . will the minister inform the house when the government stopped paying into the scheme ? there was a substantial increase when superannuation came in in 1974 , matched by british coal . is it not correct that , after 1984 , the government made no contribution to the contribution holiday ? the hon . member is passionate to speed ahead . i urge him to be a little more patient . we are exploring all of these points , and i am getting to them — fear not . the other 50 % was payable to the guarantor . the government of the day agreed to leave their share of surpluses in the scheme as the investment reserve . this acts as a buffer against a future deficit . the arrangements for sharing scheme surpluses were agreed between the trustees and the government in their role as guarantor to the mineworkers ’ pension scheme in 1994 . at that time , all parties believed the equal sharing of surplus to be a fair agreement . that predates all of us . the guarantee ensures that : a member ’s guaranteed pension , including inflation increases , will always be paid ; and a member ’s total pension , including bonus pension , will not fall in cash terms . the scheme has been a success and it is to the credit of the scheme ’s trustees that they have invested in such a way as to enable those returns , and we know as politicians that decisions on pensions and pension reserves are not always as successful as this . but it is the guarantee that makes higher returns possible . without the guarantee , the trustees would have to invest far more cautiously so as to avoid losing money and risk being unable to meet scheme obligations . in a former role in the dwp , i have also been responding to debates where pension schemes have failed , and we can not lose sight of that . we have seen this scenario with many other pension schemes . few equivalent schemes have been able to generate surpluses and fewer still are able to use those surpluses to improve member benefits . the presence of the guarantee allows the trustees to invest in a way that targets high returns and generates bonuses for members . the trustees acknowledge the importance of the guarantee and the ability to generate the bonuses that it creates . the scheme website states that a typical member ’s pension today is around 33 % higher in real terms than it would have been had they received only their actual earned pension up to privatisation . i welcome this success and believe that it would be unwise to tamper with such a fruitful arrangement . i acknowledge the 2021 select committee report and its recommendations . however , like my predecessors , i can not agree to implement them . this is a question of balance , and i recognise that there are strongly held different viewpoints , but like the trustees , the government recognise the importance of the guarantee and are committed to it . all scheme members will continue to receive their full pension entitlement . that commitment is unwavering . implementing the report ’s recommendations would shift the balance of risk to the taxpayer in a way that the government consider would be disproportionate . the minister at the time of the report met the trustees , following publication of the report , to hear their views . she set out that any changes to the surplus sharing arrangements would need the trustees ’ agreement to give up the guarantee , which the trustees declined . the minister then invited the trustees to put forward any further proposals to changes to surplus sharing , emphasising that the guarantee would need to form part of any discussions . to date , none has been received . the government have agreed some scheme changes , though , including additional protections for bonus pensions , and changes to mitigate potential unfair impacts of recent inflation changes . i stress that we are also open to further suggestions . i was pleased to have worked with the trustees and the then minister on the issue of bonuses . i appreciate the arguments that today ’s minister is making , and no one underestimates how important the guarantee is , but does he acknowledge that members of the mineworkers ’ pension scheme have to date paid £ 4.8 billion for that guarantee ? absolutely , but nobody knew how this would go when the deal was struck . at the time the deal was struck , it was deemed to be fair , but like many other pension schemes it could easily have gone the other way . if it had , we would not now be having a debate to say , “ well , we need to excuse the taxpayer . ” it was a fair deal at the time , and we seek to ensure that it continues to overdeliver . the minister said that it was a fair deal at the time . i was working down the pit at the time . i assure him that nobody i worked with thought that it was a fair deal ; we thought that it was forced upon the trustees . it was , “ take it or leave it . ” it has proved not to have been a fair deal . as i said , when the last miner dies , billions of pounds will go to the treasury . we have received a 50 % surplus in return . does the minister think that is fair — yes or no ? that presumes the investments will continue to return at the rates they have ; they could just as easily go the other way , which i suspect is why the trustees were reluctant to release the guarantee . however , to be clear , i remain open to exploring options for improvements to the scheme , and would welcome any suggestions that the trustees wish to make . the door is firmly open . future outcomes are not known . any market volatility could impact future scheme valuations , and the guarantee will provide even greater value should market conditions make it harder to generate returns . if there is a deficit in the future , members will still see their guaranteed pensions increase by rpi , and will continue to receive bonus pensions to ensure that their total pension does not fall in cash terms . if the investment reserve that the government leave in the scheme to act as a buffer is exhausted , funds from the government will be found to ensure that payments continue to be made to scheme members . to be absolutely clear , that commitment from the government is unwavering . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . if i may , i will answer that in a moment , because i will now turn back to the report . in laying the report before parliament , the ombudsman brought matters to the house ’s attention , making it clear that parliament has a role in responding to the report . the government intend to engage fully and constructively with parliament . i view this debate as a crucial part of that process . i remind the house about what the ombudsman ’s report says — and indeed does not say . the ombudsman has looked not at the decision to equalise the state pension age but rather at how that decision was communicated by the dwp . that is important to understand , as the motion calls on the government to “ deliver prompt compensation to women born in the 1950s who had their state pension age raised . ” importantly , the ombudsman ’s report hinted at the department ’s decisions over a narrow period between 2005 and 2007 , and their effect on individual notifications . the ombudsman has not found that women have directly lost out financially as a result dwp actions . the report stated : “ we do not find that it ” — the dwp ’s communication — “ resulted in them suffering direct financial loss . ” the final report does not say that all women born in the 1950s will have been adversely impacted , as many women were aware that the state pension age had changed . the stage 1 report found that between 1995 and 2004 , the dwp ’s communication of changes to the state pension age reflected the standards that the ombudsman would expect it to meet . that report also confirmed that accurate information about changes to the state pension age was publicly available in leaflets , through the dwp pension education campaigns and dwp agencies and on its website . however , when considering the department ’s actions between august 2005 and december 2007 , the ombudsman came to the view that they resulted in 1950s - born women receiving individual notice later than they might have done had different decisions been made . i welcome the wide - ranging contributions from members on behalf of their constituents . i have recently been contacted by constituents about the imminent closure of the hall , a small community space in east village , stratford — one of very few in the area . as we know , such spaces are absolutely invaluable . ours hosts loads of events , including meetings of the brownies and the girl guides . i am making representations to get living , the developer responsible for that decision . it has , frankly , been responsible for a whole bunch of questionable decisions over recent years , including during the cladding scandal and on exorbitant service changes . can we have a debate in government time on how the actions of developers have undermined the olympic legacy and failed local residents ? we have seen many injustices debated in this house . just today , we have seen the injustice of the waspi women . in recent weeks , we have spoken about the infected blood scandal and , more recently , the post office scandal . tonight , we are going to debate another scandal : the mineworkers ’ pension scheme scandal . some 25 % of the united kingdom is on top of old coalmines , so i had hoped that 25 % of this chamber would be full tonight , but it is not . maybe there are a few reasons for that . the issue has been debated a lot in this place , both before and since i came into parliament , so maybe certain mps are getting a bit fed up of saying the same old thing , but we will keep trying . i started in the pits in the mid-1980s . i went to work at sutton colliery , in north nottinghamshire , with my dad paul anderson . he was a rope fitter , and i went to work with him underground . i had a good time working with my dad and my friends at sutton colliery , which was a family pit . it was a small coalmine with small coal seams and difficult conditions . it was a family pit where brothers worked with their brothers , dads and grandads . it was a proper community , but like all coalmines , there was tragedy underground . at sutton colliery in 1957 , there was a methane explosion and , sadly , five men lost their lives . i knew some of the friends , families and descendants of the people who died . i then went on to cresswell colliery , in north derbyshire , to do my coalface training . it was another family pit where , again , men worked with their sons , and brothers worked with their brothers , and it too was tinged with tragedy . in 1950 , there was a fire at cresswell colliery and , sadly , 83 men and boys lost their lives . the mine rescuers had to seal the pit off underground to save the colliery , so that it could produce coal again . they sealed off some of the old workings and left the men inbye , because there was no chance of saving them , but when they took the stops down just a few months later , the men were on the other side . some of them had scratched their names into the wall . it was terrible , and this sort of thing is hard to explain to people who have not worked down a coalmine . it was a very tight - knit community , and people worked in difficult conditions . i had just over 10 years of working in awful conditions , but my grandad charlie had 45 years down the coalmine and finished up at norton hill colliery . it would have been 50 years , but he took a break between 1940 and 1945 , and went to fight hitler . then he came back and went straight back down the pit the following week . when he finished in the pits in 1979 , he got a tankard , a certificate , 500 quid and a meagre pension — imagine that . as miners , we knew about the risks underground when we went down the pit every day . since mining started in this country in the 1600s , over 160,000 men , women and children have died in the coalmines , so we knew the risks . we knew there was always a chance that something might happen , but these were the risks we took . the miners took these risks for simple reasons : to earn a wage , put food on the table and make sure their kids were well dressed . in 1994 , when i was still working in the pits , they were privatised . in my area , it was rj budge mining that took over the pits . at that time , a big bone of contention was what was going to happen with the mps , or the mineworkers ’ pension scheme . it was probably one of the richest pension schemes in the world at that time , and was worth hundreds of millions , if not billions , in today ’s money . it was always accepted that there would be a 70:30 split in favour of the miners . when the then government sat around the table with the trustees to make an offer to guarantee the mineworkers ’ pension scheme , we automatically surmised that there would be a 70:30 split , which would have been fair . but at the last minute , it ended up being — and depending on who you talk to , whether it is the trustees at the time or the mining organisations involved in campaigning , nobody can get to the bottom of it — a “ take it or leave it ” 50:50 deal . the government at the time never undertook a proper financial risk assessment or had actuarial advice on the split . we can never get to the bottom of that — it was a simple “ take it or leave it . ” when i was working at the pit with my friends , we never really had a say in this . i can not remember any man i worked with underground being happy with the 50:50 split , because we knew how rich the pension fund was . thirty years on from 1994 , successive labour and conservative governments have not paid a single penny into the pension scheme , which is a cash cow . they have taken £ 4.8 billion out of the scheme . some mining groups say the sum is nearer to £ 10 billion , but i will take the figure i have here . in just the last three years , the government have taken more than £ 400 million out of the surplus , which is a lot of money . this is miners ’ money . in effect , the treasury ’s guarantee is an insurance scheme . it guarantees to make up the shortfall and pay the bonuses , and so on , if there is not a surplus , but i can not think of any insurance scheme anywhere in this country , or the world , that has never had to pay out . in 30 years , not a penny has come from the treasury or the taxpayer to top up the mineworkers ’ pension scheme . i think that is a bit of a scandal , and so does my mining community .