thank you , madam deputy speaker , for allowing me to make my maiden speech . when i drive around my congleton constituency , i thank my lucky stars that i have the privilege of both living in and representing somewhere so very beautiful . it is made up of gorgeous rolling countryside , farmland , hedgerows and oak trees . the farmers work all hours to produce the food that we need . it has views of the giant radio telescope at jodrell bank and the natural beauty spot bosley cloud . it is arcadia within commuting distance of manchester , crewe and stoke , and i can not tell the house how much i truly love it . the constituency is a growing place , with around 5,000 extra houses in the last few years . the population is divided between the cheshire market towns of alsager , sandbach and congleton , alongside the larger village of holmes chapel , and many beautiful smaller villages , such as rode heath , church lawton and goostrey . there can be few more idyllic spots in the country than sitting outside the swettenham arms next to the lovell arboretum , overlooking st peter ’s , the archetypal village church . though each town and village has its own unique character and history , the joys and challenges experienced by the families who live there are often remarkably similar . they include families whose children have special educational needs and disabilities , who often face extensive challenges getting the diagnoses and support that they need . those families need our help , and i will do everything that i can to assist them . i have been pleased to hear the prime minister referring repeatedly in this chamber to those difficulties , and i am confident that he will help us too . families will also benefit from labour ’s review of shared parental leave . some 54,000 women a year lose their job when they are pregnant or on maternity leave . women actually out - earn men in their 20s . the gender pay gap is in many respects actually a motherhood penalty . men taking longer periods of paternity leave is a way that we could normalise parental leave and potentially reduce those problems . i thank the government for starting the consultation on this matter imminently . i pay tribute to campaign groups such as pregnant then screwed , rights of women , the dad shift , parenting out loud , and the tuc and trade unions , which are all doing incredible things in this field . many homeowners in my constituency have been affected by leasehold and fleecehold problems , and will welcome our planned reforms on these issues , to which i intend to contribute . they include older people , often the backbone of our communities , who provide childcare for grandchildren , and often volunteer as well . sometimes , however , they do so in avoidable pain while on nhs waiting lists that are too long . those are just a few of the issues that i intend to apply myself to as mp for congleton . let me take the house back to congleton ’s history . congleton is known as beartown , owing to a local story that in the 1600s the town saved up to buy a new bible . shortly before the summer fête , the village bear died , so the townsfolk agreed that rather than buy their bible they would postpone the purchase and get a new bear with the money instead . congleton is very entrepreneurial across the whole constituency , and many of our small businesses feature references to the bear . it is also in our local iconography everywhere . we have the beartown tap and beartown beer . the bear features pretty much everywhere , as does our fantastic statue of elizabeth wolstenholme - elmy , which was lobbied and fundraised for by local feminists . elizabeth , who based herself in congleton from 1874 until her death in 1918 , played a significant role in the women ’s suffrage movement , founding the women ’s social and political union and campaigning for women ’s education and voting rights . i hope that i shall think of her often in this place . another of our most famous local figures , although quite different , is harry styles , whose hometown of holmes chapel is now a point of pilgrimage for his fans . i am sure that everyone is sorry to hear today of the death of his former bandmate liam payne — we all extend our condolences to his friends and family . local people have set up a walking trail associated with harry styles . if anyone fancies it , i would strongly recommend following it , with a stop in any of our local independent businesses on holmes chapel high street . i would probably include a drink at the george and dragon or the bottle bank , or both . i know that both publicans do a lot of voluntary work within our community . people volunteering is common in my constituency , as i know it is in the constituencies of many other members . whether they are coaching football at vale juniors or any of the other community sports clubs — there are too many for me to list — planting trees and conserving and maintaining our woodland and footpaths , as the sandbach woodland and wildlife group does , and as a similar group does in congleton ; helping young people through uniformed groups such as scouts , guides and the various air cadets , some of which i have visited ; running schemes to support men ’s mental health , such as the goostrey community shed , holmes chapel men in sheds , or the new sandbach men walking and talking group ; or even running a community energy power plant in congleton hydro , we have the most amazing set of citizens . i am so grateful for the fantastic contribution that they make to help others , support those who need it , and truly make my constituency the fantastic place that it is . on the topic of contribution , i pay tribute to my predecessor , fiona bruce . congleton has had three mps in its history , all of them women : ann winterton , fiona bruce and now me . i know that many christians in the constituency and beyond appreciated fiona bruce ’s advocacy on behalf of the religious community , both in the uk and internationally , in her role as envoy for religious freedom . we have many active local church groups in our community , and they contribute a great deal of very varied support . churches and secular volunteers and organisations , including food banks , food pantries and the old saw mill , are all quietly providing much - needed food support within the community . they do this for a far larger number of adults and children than the apparent affluence of the area would superficially lead one to expect . as a discrimination lawyer , and someone who went into politics because of the value that i place on equality and inclusion , i will continue to advocate for the rights and freedoms of all my constituents , and celebrate the diversity within our community . i recently attended the one world festival in alsager , which was first established by margaret keeling 30 years ago . it celebrates the diversity of nationalities living within the alsager community , with food , activities and lots of performances from local schoolchildren . it really is a delight — thank you , margaret . another of the many achievements of the fantastic volunteers in my constituency is that we have regular pride events . congleton held its first pride about five years ago . i pay tribute to richard walton , ronan clayton and all those who were involved in setting it up . it is now ably chaired by malcolm pope , who is taking it from strength to strength . the excellent curator anna maluk put on a pride exhibition in congleton museum , hosting photos from those early events and featuring art from the local lgbtqia+ community . since then , more pride events have grown in sandbach , alsager and , for the first time this summer , holmes chapel . at one of these events , it was suggested to me that these are really just a family fun day — a village fête , if you will . it is true that the events are fun , fabulous and family - friendly , but beyond the live music and bright clothing remains a serious message . the hard - working volunteers who make these pride events happen do so in the face of repeated homophobic hate crimes . similarly , there is still a backdrop of fear attendant in many women ’s daily lives . women in my constituency have written or spoken to me about their experiences of sexual violence . i say to the young women who have talked to me — you know who you are — that i will fight for you , and all young people , in this place every day . that will include ensuring that , when embracing new technology and innovation , as we have done this week at the international investment summit , we find ways of protecting people from new threats — whether that be people looking at tractors on their smartphones in this workplace , or artificial intelligence baking in discriminatory decision making . unfortunately , new technologies also bring the potential for harassment , discrimination and abuse , and we must not be caught off guard — we must get on the front foot on that . my constituency has a long history of developing new technologies . the constituency boundary bisects the site of jodrell bank , the amazing radio telescope . sandbach was the proud home of erf and foden trucks . the first foden traction engine was built in sandbach in 1881 , and that was followed by the production of heavy goods vehicles for 150 years . the history and heritage of foden still runs through the blood of the town , with the annual transport festival and its incredible parade of vintage trucks , wagons , classic cars and even the odd plane on the common . my constituency is also home to one of the world ’s leading brass bands , foden ’s band , which was born out of the works in 1902 and has twice won , and twice been runner - up , in the national brass band championships of great britain . i will work across this house to stand up for the incredible , entrepreneurial and community - minded people and businesses of the beautiful place that is the congleton constituency . lastly , i want to say some thank yous . i thank the volunteers who helped me to get here and continue to support me , to whom i am very grateful . that includes those from the labour party , and i make special mention of the fabian women ’s network mentoring scheme . i thank my adored family , who are in the public gallery today . when i am in westminster , i miss you so much . i hope i do all of you proud . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i start by congratulating my hon . friend i want to start by saying what an honour it is to stand here as the member of parliament for banbury . as a banbury lad who has never sought to represent anywhere else , i want to repeat what i told residents on the doorstep during the campaign : this is the job i have always wanted . to everyone who helped make that happen , i can only say thank you . i also want those residents to know that now i have this job , i promise that i will work hard every day to deliver for them , whether they voted for me or not . what makes this an even prouder moment for me is that i stand here as the first labour member of parliament for the banbury constituency . until banbury is a beautiful part of the world to live in and represent . it is most famous for our nursery rhyme , known across the english - speaking world : “ ride a cock - horse to banbury cross , to see a fine lady upon a white horse ; with rings on her fingers and bells on her toes , she shall have music wherever she goes . ” banbury ’s history is more than that , though ; indeed , it is more than just the town itself . the constituency reflects our country ’s history , including in its foundations and its landscape . we have the neolithic and bronze age rollright stones ; the settlement on the edge of chipping norton left to us by the romans ; the norman castle mound at deddington ; and broughton castle which , as well being a stunning late - medieval stately home , is likely to be recognisable to many members as the setting for tv ’s “ wolf hall ” , and the films “ shakespeare in love ” and “ three men and a little lady ” . i was once told that one of the only request to film there that the owners declined was when the studio wanted to paint it pink , which was probably wise . in the village of wroxton , where i went to school , we have the former home of lord north . he is also buried in wroxton , giving us something that not all constituencies have : the resting place of a former prime minister . bliss mill , tooley ’s boatyard and the oxford canal are all remnants of the area ’s growth during the industrial revolution . but the most colourful time in our history is undoubtedly the civil war , when banbury itself was on the side of the roundheads , despite its castle — right in the middle of the town — being on the side of the cavaliers . the people of banbury were so unmistakeably puritan that a poem was written about it : “ to banbury came i , o profane one ! where i saw a puritane - one , hanging of his cat on monday , for killing of a mouse on sunday . ” more happily , “ the puritans ” is the nickname for the only supporter - owned football club in oxfordshire , banbury united . i mention all this not just because i am really proud of where i call home and its role in our past , but because i want the house to understand what the banbury constituency is all about . although it did not change hands politically between 1922 and 2024 , change did come to banbury in a big way . old industries such as making cloth in chipping norton or aluminium in banbury went , while new ones such as logistics with companies such as dhl and twe haulage , food processing with fine lady bakeries and go fresh , and high - end mechanical engineering with the haas formula 1 team and prodrive came in instead . other industries , such as brewing , moved within the constituency . we can no longer get a pint in a hunt edmunds pub , but hooky beer from hook norton is on sale across the united kingdom . the building of the m40 in many ways permanently changed banbury from a small , semi - industrial market town into something completely different . thousands of new homes have gone up as our area has become increasingly attractive for commuters to oxford and london , but we still have a council waiting list that has quadrupled in a decade and a private sector that can not meet the need . meanwhile , vital infrastructure such as schools , roads and health services have failed to meet demand , posing fair questions from the community for those , like me , who support the government ’s ambitious house building agenda . while they have changed , banbury , chipping norton , charlbury and the villages of north and west oxfordshire have not lost their sense of community . the community united across political divides , and none , in defence of our local horton general hospital when it was faced with downgrading , successfully fighting it off in 2008 and less successfully in 2016 . as the use of food banks grew in the years after 2010 , people across the area came together to help support those in need . for example , the chippy larder in chipping norton has become a much - loved community resource . food security in banbury can not be considered without mentioning our rural farming communities and perhaps the most famous farm in the country : clarkson ’s farm . for all the entertainment that the series has provided , for me the most important aspect of it is the light that it shines on the huge challenges faced by our farmers , and not just in the banbury constituency but throughout the uk . i hope that the government ’s programme to support them will relieve many of the burdens that have made farming so challenging for so long . southill solar farm on the edge of the wychwood forest near charlbury provides community owned power to 1,200 homes . that is another reason i am so passionate about this government ’s exciting agenda on renewable energy . then there is the volunteer driver service in banbury , taking the elderly or those less able to hospital and gp appointments at nominal rates . throughout the pandemic , as in other places , people across banbury worked hard to help those less fortunate during that most testing of times . banbury ’s community , led by some of its many thousands of polish citizens , got together again to gather supplies to support the ukrainian civilians fleeing that conflict , while welcoming others into their homes and communities . on that note , i pay tribute to my predecessor , victoria prentis . although there was much in the campaign that we disagreed on , this side of the house was united with the conservative party in support for ukraine . i pay tribute to victoria ’s decency and her clear compassion for humanity , exemplified as much by her taking a ukrainian refugee into her home as by her nine years of service to the community . as for myself , i stand here in support of this government and their mandate for change — something that banbury has a history of embracing . before i finish , i want to thank my family for their support , in particular my wife who , despite having multiple sclerosis , remains the strongest , most steady and most stable woman i have ever met . i stand here as someone banbury born and bred , ready to build a better britain and a better banbury , and i am determined to do it . i call yuan yang to make her maiden speech . i congratulate my hon . friend in my previous life , before coming into this place , i spent eight years interviewing the leaders of international businesses , many of whom had long - standing commitments to investment in the uk , but who repeatedly told me and my former colleagues at the financial times that political instability was putting them off making future investments . that is why i very much welcome the remarks of our minister on the international investment summit and the importance of the private sector ’s partnership with our government . the 10 - year project that we have for national renewal , along with our 10 - year industrial strategy , shows our commitment to long - term economic ambition and planning . i congratulate the organisers of the summit , which brought together more than 300 industry leaders and secured more than £ 60 billion of investment . that is 60 % more than was raised last year , and it will create nearly 38,000 jobs , one of which is bringing elton john out of retirement . unfortunately , private investment in the uk since the global financial crisis has been much less “ rocket man ” , and more “ tiny dancer ” . over the last decade and a half , britain has experienced a much larger slowdown in the growth of capital intensity than comparative countries such as the us , france and germany , and it is that , alongside our skills growth , which accounts for our productivity puzzle . i very much welcome the appointment of john van reenen , the wonderful lse economist , to our council of economic advisors . he has done important work on productivity in the uk , and he suggests that our post - financial crisis fall in productivity growth is primarily due to a large fall in capital accumulation . in other words , british workers are being held back by low levels of public and private investment , and that is what our government need to unlock to succeed in our growth mission . we will provide stability , but stability alone is not enough . in the 21st century we must do more to provide industry and business leaders with the leadership that they require to navigate our increasingly complex geopolitical world , in which there is fragmentation of supply chains across the world , as well as the green transition . that means an industrial strategy . i welcome the publication of our government ’s industrial strategy earlier this month , and particularly the focus on life sciences as one of the key eight sectors for investment . my constituency of earley and woodley in the thames valley is a prime location for foreign direct investment , particularly in life sciences , and i am proud that the thames valley is the fastest growing region in the uk outside london . i congratulate the thames valley chamber of commerce , with which i have already worked in my first 100 days , on securing over the last decade more than 1,000 instances of foreign direct investment . we can measure the excitement of business and the private sector for our labour government by the amount of engagement i have already had from businesses in my constituency and through thames valley chamber of commerce . the biopharmaceutical group lonza , which is swiss in origin , received a grant of £ 30 million over the summer to expand and relocate to my constituency in the thames valley park , which is one of three business parks in the area alongside thames valley science park and green park . i recently met bayer , originally a german company , which employs hundreds of people at its headquarters in my constituency , and contributes to crucial health and life science research in the uk . advancements in life sciences have fundamentally improved not just the economy and innovation of the uk , but the length and quality of life here and around the world . that is why i welcome the health secretary ’s mission to ensure that the nhs receives the cutting - edge treatments being pioneered by companies in my constituency and beyond . life science investment , if done correctly , can be a significant driver of growth and productivity — our central mission . i look forward very much to meeting the minster for industry next week to discuss how we can give full range to life sciences companies in our constituencies , and to the clinical research taking place in the royal berkshire hospital , which is at the forefront of much research in medical trials . that hospital will benefit greatly from private and public investment . businesses do not exist in isolation , and what makes some countries prosper is the strength of their institutions . responsible and highly productive businesses wish to retain their skilled workforces , who require countries with well - functioning public service provision , infrastructure and accessible housing . those companies want political stability and a regulatory framework that works for business , workers , and the consumer . that is why labour ’s pitch to business does not end with the international investment summit , but continues with legislation that the government are passing , such as the employment rights bill . providing the foundations for businesses to thrive means fixing the foundations of our economy and society , and that is what i am proud to say our labour government will do . diolch yn fawr iawn — i thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the privilege of making my maiden speech in this house . i follow a long list of maiden speeches and so i perhaps offer no novelty , but i will take the opportunity of offering familiarity . i come to this debate on the international investment summit having spent the last decade on the frontline of investment , backing the inventors of artificial intelligence data and wider software businesses across this country and the united states . i therefore know the cause with depth and personal experience , and in particular i know that no working - age person in this country has seen a start - up go to the ftse top 10 . in the united states , eight out of 10 have experienced that . in the last decade of innovation , britons in this country and in the vale of glamorgan have been denied the opportunity of shaping their destiny . decline no more , because i know from speaking to investors , including those at the summit , that they believe what i know with this labour government : change is on the way and has begun . my role has been to put the vale of glamorgan front and centre in that wave of change , but i start by also recognising the dual impact that change in this house always has . for every maiden contribution , there is a contribution that has been , and in my case i wish to recognise that of my predecessor , the right hon . alun cairns , conservative mp for the vale of glamorgan for 14 years . in those 14 years alun served our constituency with sincerity . in fact , he was so sincere that i remember knocking on doors in cadoxton in barry with the best constituency labour party in the country , only to have my hopes dashed by a lovely elderly lady who said , “ i am going to be voting for alun , the best labour mp this town has ever had . ” we all carry an inflated sense of our personal vote in this house , beyond our political allegiances , but in that moment i have to say that i felt and saw one . i congratulate alun on his service and wish him the best with the inevitable duality of change that we share , but i also commit to him some continuity in the service that he and his predecessor , the labour mp john smith , offered the constituents of the vale of glamorgan — and continuity also because the cause of barry ’s development , which i know alun initiated , will echo for years to come as my top priority too . i offer continuity because in fact the vale of glamorgan stands out for its continuity . there is continuity as the world centre of education . it was in llantwit major and st illtud ’s church that the uk ’s first college was sited , not only home to st illtud , but also host to st david in the early sixth century . in was in cowbridge in 1795 that one of the first gorsedd of the bards was hosted by iolo morganwg , since then a font of appreciation for the welsh language , welsh literature and welsh poetry . there is continuity not just in education but in energy , with barry being the world ’s powerhouse and the largest coal exporting port in this country , and indeed the largest in the world in 1913 , and with aberthaw not just one of the most advanced power plants of its time , but now the host of my and my constituents ’ future dreams of a centre of excellence in green energy . alongside energy and education , there is continuity in the world ’s pinnacle of natural beauty — a title i will only share , perhaps , with my hon . friend finally , there is continuity not just across education , energy and the beauty that we have , but in the heart and humour of the people of the vale of glamorgan . barry is the town that hosts “ gavin and stacey ” , and in particular the heart and humour of uncle bryn , my favourite character , who when driving down the m4 blasting out james blunt songs has been a personal inspiration to me each time i leave this esteemed chamber for the even more esteemed comfort of barrybados . i have seen the heart of the community spirit across the vale of glamorgan in big bocs bwyd , which is an initiative across schools that started in barry and now goes beyond it , ensuring that no child goes hungry when they are learning . there is the real struggle and the fight that i see each week in the vale domestic abuse services in my constituency , fighting the onslaught of violence against women that we have seen not just in the vale but across this country , and there is the powerful heart of the voice choirs of barry , llantwit major , and cowbridge , which were able to combine the pure heart of “ calon lân ” with the deep optimism of “ the greatest showman ” in one night . i come here with news of the heart and humour of the vale of glamorgan , but also to report its honest challenges . we have the honest challenge of barry , where , when delivering medicines as a volunteer , i learned that the pharmacist was issuing multiples of painkillers per patient , compared with the same pharmacist in cardiff . we have the honest challenge of our beautiful farmlands , where third and fourth- generation farming families are fighting a great but difficult fight against the combined challenges of weather , disease and uncertainty . we have the honest challenge of the veterans of the vale of glamorgan , who are not seeking the world , but simply seeking a bit of public service for the exceptional national service they gave us . money does not buy most things in life . it does not solve most of our problems , but its absence and the deprivation entrenched over the last decade are at the root of many of them . in particular , that has chipped away at the dignity of my community . that is why i come here with the twin ambitions of greater prosperity and a deeper bond of dignity in the vale of glamorgan and across the uk . i do so not as a political slogan or out of political theory , but out of a history of personal gratitude , because it was 22 years ago that the vale of glamorgan and south wales , including cardiff , offered a newly arrived set of parents the opportunity of a minimum wage and a night shift to subsidise the sleep of their young boys . in the absence of any holidays , it was barry island that first gave those two young boys the opportunity of relief , and perhaps even some delight , over the weekend . it was south wales , where i grew up with my brother in a situation of particular economic stress , where i felt , through the deepest privileges of education , that i could go on to advise the prime minister and the civil service , to advise ftse boards across the city , to invest in tomorrow ’s inventors and ultimately to stand before the house as wales ’s first member of parliament from an ethnic minority background . when i stand for my twin ambitions of prosperity and dignity for the vale , i will do so out of that personal history of gratitude . for as long as i serve as the vale ’s voice here in westminster , i will fight each day for the people in my community . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i am grateful for the opportunity to make my maiden speech today . i congratulate my hon . friends the members for ossett and denby dale ( jade botterill ) , for congleton ( mrs russell ) , for buckingham and bletchley ( callum anderson ) and for banbury ( sean woodcock ) on their excellent contributions today — my thanks to them all . it is the honour of my life to have been elected as the member of parliament for bangor aberconwy , and i offer my heartfelt thanks to everyone who supported me on my journey to this place : to my partner and my two kids , who i will not name — because my entry into the world of politics has already caused them enough embarrassment as it is — to my brother mike , my sister pam , my nieces and nephews , and all my friends back home ; and to my dad , who is watching from the gallery today , something that would never have been possible were it not for the incredible staff of ysbyty gwynedd , who have saved his life on more than one occasion . i want to thank my incredible campaign team , my agent jim hoey and ken stevens . i also pay tribute to the late councillor bill chapman , who is very sorely missed . without his encouragement much earlier in my career , i would not be here today . bangor aberconwy encompasses the former constituency of aberconwy , as well as parts of what were arfon and clywd west . i thank all three of my predecessors , and their staff , for all their work in the support of local residents . robin millar served as the member for aberconwy from 2019 . i know that his work supporting hoteliers during the pandemic was very much appreciated . david jones served as the member of parliament for clywd west and served in the role as secretary of state for wales during his time here . hywel williams served as the member of parliament for arfon and the previous caernarfon constituency for over 23 years — a member who was and still is very well respected by the communities that he served . i also pay special tribute to betty williams , who served as the labour mp for conwy from 1997 to 2010 . she is a real labour legend who is still remembered with huge fondness locally . if i can be half as good an mp as betty was , i will be doing okay . i have listened to many maiden speeches and noted that there is hot competition for whose constituency is the most beautiful in all the land — i am sorry , but game on ! bangor aberconwy includes the seaside resort of llandudno , the historic town of conwy , betws - y - coed , bangor pier , the carneddau mountains , the dyffryn ogwen valley — too many beautiful places to name . i must , of course , mention my hometown of penmaenmawr , which was the favoured holiday destination of prime minister william gladstone , and my adopted home of llanfairfechan . i have noticed , too , that it is customary to elaborate on one ’s political roots — childhood memories of being dragged along to party meetings or folding leaflets at the kitchen table — but i am afraid that was not me . politics was not really discussed in our house . for our family , direct action meant going out with a bucket and torch to rescue frogs . largely thanks to my mother , my formative years were spent bird watching , pond dipping , bat counting and on long mountain walks . my mum knew the value of our natural world and how vital it is that we protect it . i will make it my mission in this place to do so in her memory . when i was 11 , my mum ’s life changed . she enrolled on an access course , did a - levels , then graduated with a degree in botany — no mean feat with three young kids . the fact that she was able to access higher education is testament not only to the last labour government , but to the grit and determination of working people in our community . to understand why is to learn the founding story of bangor university : 140 years ago tomorrow , on all across bangor aberconwy , you will find incredible people who work hard day in , day out to support others in our community — people like jaynie black and the volunteers at ty hapus ; ginnie rogers and the friends of mostyn street ; brenda at hope restored ; the wonderful women i met last week at dyma ni befriending ; pobl i bobl ; maes ni ; hwb ogwen ; our food banks , our churches and our mosques ; and our town , city and community councillors . there are too many to mention , but we owe them all a huge debt of thanks . diolch o galon i chi gyd . [ translation : heartfelt thanks to you all . ] i am proud to be part of a labour government who are firmly on the side of working people . i am proud to be part of a labour government who are committed to breaking down the barriers to opportunity for young people growing up in communities like ours . and i am proud to be part of a labour government who understand that tackling the climate and nature crisis is not only the biggest challenge we face , but an opportunity for economic growth . the subject of today ’s debate is this week ’s record - breaking international investment summit . before coming to this place , i spent my career working with start - ups and smes , so i know how important economic and political stability is for business . under this new government , britain is truly the best place to do business , and there is huge potential in our corner of wales ready to be unleashed . we have a proud industrial history ; a wealth of talent in science and technology ; and wind , waves and mountain ranges . everywhere you look , you will find ingenuity and innovation , and communities full of pride , purpose and potential . to finish , i am proud of our past and i am excited for our future . whether you live in penmaenmawr or pwllglas , bangor or bontuchel , conwy or cerrigydrudion , i will fight tooth and nail to bring investment to our area , while promoting our welsh language and culture , to make sure that our young people know that these opportunities exist and are for them . there is much to do , and it will not happen overnight , but i hope to do every single one of my constituents proud . the secretary of state was asked — what assessment she has made of the potential impact of visitor levies in scotland and wales on inbound uk tourism . responsibility for tourism levies is devolved , but we want to watch what happens in scotland and wales with close interest . one of my main hopes is to increase the number of international visitors to the uk , and ensure more and more visitors come not only to london and the south - east , but travel across the whole united kingdom . imposing taxes on tourists will only discourage people from enjoying the best of what the scottish borders and scotland have to offer . many small , rural businesses are struggling to sustain themselves , so i fear the extra tax proposed by the scottish government will be the last straw . does the minister share my concern about the impact that will have on tourism in scotland ? will the government undertake an impact study on the effect the tax will have on tourism , not just in scotland but across the uk ? despite having been a member of the scottish parliament , the hon . gentleman does not seem to understand the basis of devolution . this is a matter for the scottish government to decide . we want to have a very positive relationship with the scottish administration and , for that matter , the administration in wales . of course we will look at this . the uk government have no plans to introduce visitor levies at the moment , although there are potential benefits that might accrue to local communities , if they could be got right , but the idea of us investigating what the scottish government are doing would be completely wrong . what steps the government is taking to promote the scottish highlands as a film location for movies and television . this government are taking a fresh approach to our relationship with the scottish government and with our cultural partners across scotland . we are seeking a far more consistent and constructive relationship than the previous government . i am pleased to tell the hon . gentleman that the prime minister last week convened the first ever council of the nations and regions , and this government are putting the creative industries in every nation and region at the heart of our economic strategy . i wholeheartedly welcome that answer . scotland has great potential ; if i say that “ the traitors ” was filmed at ardross castle in my constituency , the secretary of state will know what i am talking about . i take the point that these matters are devolved , but mr angus robertson seems to flip - flop when it comes to funding the arts , so i would be grateful for everything the secretary of state can do to get netflix , or whoever , to look hard at the highlands . the hon . gentleman is absolutely right to draw attention to scotland ’s huge cultural assets . i was pleased to meet with my scottish government counterpart when i visited the edinburgh fringe over the summer . i know from the international investment summit , which the government convened earlier this week , that partners like netflix , and many other international investors , see the enormous value of scotland and the attraction of investing there . this government will do everything we can to support that , and we will put rocket boosters under the creative industries in scotland . what steps she is taking to support multi - sport grassroots facilities . this government are committed to providing high - quality , inclusive facilities that provide opportunities for everyone to get active and healthier . that is why we are investing £ 123 million across the uk in our multi - sport grassroots facilities programme . access to those facilities is vital for mental health and community cohesion , no more so than in the small towns and villages that make up my constituency . does the minister agree that even in places like that we must have equal access to such facilities ? i completely agree with my hon . friend . i was pleased to visit her constituency a few months ago ; i represent a similar area , with a collection of towns and villages . wherever communities are , across the country , we want to ensure they have access to local facilities . it is so important to get people active , particularly for mental health and wellbeing . i call the chair of the select committee . the minister will know that grassroots sports venues play a key role in improving the nation ’s health . the uk will host the t20 women ’s world cup in 2026 , and cricket will join the olympic family of sports in 2028 . the previous government committed a £ 35 million investment into 16 grassroots cricket hubs and cricket domes . will the minister commit this government to fulfilling that promise ? i am grateful to the chair of the select committee for her important question . i was pleased to meet the england and wales cricket board a few weeks ago , and i will be doing a visit with its representatives in my own constituency tomorrow . we absolutely see the benefit of cricket and , indeed , all sports across the country , but i am obviously not in a position to make spending commitments ahead of the spending review . what steps she is taking to support grassroots and non - league football . i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for his question . as i set out in a previous answer , the government are investing £ 123 million through football partners in grassroots facilities up and down the country . i recently visited knaresborough town afc in my constituency and met fantastic people who do more than just football . they share the club ’s facilities with groups such as rainbow care , which provides a lifeline to other people , not just those interested in football . due to the weather , the pitch is often waterlogged , and there is a lack of 3 g pitches in the area . will the minister meet me to talk about how we can do more to support knaresborough town and , hopefully , get a pitch down the line ? i am grateful to the hon . gentleman for his question . i am pleased to hear that he visited his local club , and i would be delighted to meet him . ahead of that meeting , though , i will ask my officials to link him up with the football foundation , which supports grassroots communities to get new pitches . i pay tribute to all the volunteers to whom he refers for their fantastic work in the community . blyth spartans in my constituency are arguably the most famous non - league club in the uk , but they are now up for sale , with the current chairman failing to deliver on his promises and to engage transparently and openly with the supporters . does my hon . friend agree that non - league football clubs are at the heart of communities and that engagement with supporters is critical to their survival ? i am incredibly grateful to my hon . friend for his question , and i completely agree . now that he has put it in hansard , perhaps blyth spartans are the most well - known club in the country . i echo his comments about fan involvement at every level of the football pyramid and , indeed , in grassroots football . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . from grassroots to professional , the number of women ’s teams has more than doubled over the past seven years . cheltenham town women have a thriving team , with junior and adult sections . sadly , one place above them in the table this season are lewes fc , who are running the “ equal fa cup ” campaign . does the minister agree that it is time for equality of prize money across the men ’s and women ’s fa cups ? i am incredibly grateful to the hon . gentleman for asking such an important question . the government are fully committed to supporting and growing women ’s sport , and to ensuring that it is on an equal footing with men ’s sport . the ambition to have equal prize money across sport , where possible , is absolutely right . i know that the football association took steps last season to double the prize fund for the women ’s fa cup , and we will pay close attention to see what happens next . what recent assessment her department has made of the impact of youth services on levels of antisocial behaviour in great grimsby and cleethorpes constituency . i am grateful to my hon . friend for all her work to support young people in her constituency over many years . it is a source of national shame that youth funding decreased by 73 % under the last government — one of the deepest cuts made to any of our public services — and that there was no real strategy for a generation of young people . this government are determined to get a grip on this issue to ensure that young people in towns such as grimsby have the opportunities that they deserve . i thank the secretary of state for her answer . a shining example of youth services and their positive impact is the haven centre in osborne street in my constituency , where a dedicated team offer diversionary activities through sports and crafts and give essential mentoring and support . since opening , the haven has played an important role in reducing antisocial behaviour , with reported incidents down by 35 % in the town centre over the last year . will the secretary of state join me in commending the staff at the haven and all the youth providers across grimsby and cleethorpes , and recognise the vital role that they play in providing safety for young people and giving them access to new skills and facilities that they otherwise would not have ? order . that was a very long question . i would be delighted to pay tribute to youth workers up and down this country , who have done incredible work . they have been a lifeline for young people in what has been a very bleak landscape for too long . i was very pleased to work with my hon . friend and the east marsh united group in her constituency , and she has done incredible work to support the community over many years in order to facilitate grimsby ’s onside youth club , of which we have a fantastic example in wigan . i very much look forward to working with her to develop this work . there is one in chorley too . as the member of parliament for a bit of grimsby , i share the support of we are determined to grip this issue . one of the things the new government discovered when we opened the books is that , although there are several funding sources within my department and across government , there is no youth strategy at all . we are determined to set that right . we will develop and co - produce a strategy for a generation of young people , working alongside them and with the incredible youth workers at the haven , the onside youth zones and many other places , including in chorley , to support a generation to succeed . what recent discussions she has had with representatives of the creative industries on ai . i have had many meetings with the creative industries , which have raised ai at every single one . i make it absolutely clear that human creativity deserves remuneration . wherever we end up , the rights of artists , musicians , publishers and journalists need to be protected while we garner the significant benefits of artificial intelligence . ai - generated creations that mimic real people — deepfakes — can lead to financial and reputational damage for musicians and other creatives . however , as the domestic violence charity refuge pointed out last year , the most common ai - generated deepfakes are non - consensual sexual depictions of women . how do the government plan to ensure that creatives , as well as women and girls , are adequately protected from the misappropriation of their voice , image , name and likeness ? i am glad that my hon . friend has raised this important issue that affects many people . in the words of stephen sondheim , “ art is n’t easy , ” and neither is the legislation in this area , but we are determined to look into it . it is already a criminal offence to share an intimate image without consent , whether real or synthetically generated , and we will deliver on our manifesto commitment to ban the creation of sexually explicit deepfakes . i call jim shannon — at least he ’s not fake . i am the real thing , mr speaker . the creative industries in strangford and across northern ireland are very important . in responding to the point raised by the hon . gentleman makes a good point . although some of the areas we are discussing are , of course , devolved , we want to make sure that the whole uk moves forward in the same direction . i am keen to talk to my counterpart in northern ireland about this subject . i call the shadow minister . it is an honour to stand at the dispatch box for the first time , although i have to admit that it is not how i pictured it . i will do my best not to be a pain in your neck , mr speaker . in a nutshell , the creative industries are worried that the government will essentially give away their intellectual property . i am pleased to hear the minister ’s response , but the growing concerns were raised by the chair of the select committee following comments by a minister in the department for science , innovation and technology . with that in mind , will the minister confirm that he will not give away ip through an exemption ? will he assure the house that he will not implement the eu ’s approach , given its flaws ? finally , will he commit to holding a summit between the tech and creative industries to explore licensing and other models ? it is absolutely essential that we protect intellectual property , which is one of the key things this country has to sell . we have already had two meetings with representatives from the creative industries and tech companies , and we are keen to move forward . i welcome the hon . gentleman on his décolleté first appearance at the dispatch box . however , i gently push back on his suggestion , as i think the previous government had embraced bucks fizz more than anything else : “ do n’t let your indecision take you from behind . ” the previous government did absolutely nothing in this territory . we are determined to get to a proper resolution that satisfies the needs of both the creative industries and artificial intelligence . what steps she is taking to support grassroots athletics clubs to maintain their facilities . grassroots sports clubs are at the heart of communities up and down the country . we know just how important they are , which is why we are committed to continuing to support high - quality , inclusive facilities to get people more active . crewe and nantwich athletic club , which celebrated its 50th anniversary this year , is home to the only competitive - standard athletics track in south cheshire . however , the track is in desperate need of improvements so that the club can continue to flourish and support the young people who use its facilities . will the minister meet me to discuss what support might be available to deliver those crucial improvements ? i thank my hon . friend for his important question and congratulate crewe and nantwich athletic club on half a century — what a great achievement ! such sports clubs are crucial to helping our young people to pursue their sporting passions . i am happy to meet my hon . friend to discuss the matter , but in the meantime i will ask my department to link the club up with england athletics and other bodies for further discussion of the support available . what steps she is taking to support the financial sustainability of english football . i thank my hon . friend for raising this incredibly important issue . football is one of our greatest exports and is a source of joy to people across the country . for too long , however , robust protections have not been in place to ensure that every town , village and city can share in that success . may i take the opportunity to pay tribute to the former sports minister dame tracey crouch for her work leading the fan - led review of football governance ? the government committed in the king ’s speech to the football governance bill and we expect to introduce it shortly . i associate myself with that tribute and thank the secretary of state for her reply . my constituency is the proud home of reading football club , which managed to stay up last season against the odds but which has been the victim of financial mismanagement by absent owners . we desperately need the government ’s football governance bill , which will set up a regulator to safeguard clubs like reading and prevent future abuses . will the minister meet local fans and me to discuss what we can do to protect the club ? the sports minister , my hon . friend what steps she is taking with cabinet colleagues to tackle the harmful effects of gambling . what steps she is taking with cabinet colleagues to tackle the harmful effects of gambling . the government are committed to strengthening protections to ensure that people can continue to enjoy gambling as a pastime without the harms that can ensue from problem gambling . we have a dedicated minister for gambling , baroness twycross , who has met representatives across the industry and those affected by problem gambling to seek the widest range of views and ensure that the government have a robust policy in place . many of us in this house have encountered harrowing stories from constituents of the devastating impact of gambling suicide . the gambling commission estimates that 2.5 % of the population meet the threshold to be categorised as suffering from problem gambling and in need of nhs treatment . my constituency is considered a high - problem gambling area , which means that we have a high number of people who meet the threshold . are steps being taken to progress towards an independent statutory levy on the industry to fund the gambling treatment and independent information that so many people urgently need ? the government are committed to reviewing all the available evidence and listening to the first - hand constituency experience of members of parliament such as my hon . friend . that way , we can strike the right balance and ensure not only that the industry , which brings joy to many people , continues to thrive , but that we have the most robust protections in place to prevent problem gambling . i will update the house soon on the government ’s strategy , and baroness twycross will be happy to discuss the issue with mps on both sides of the house who have personal experience and evidence that we will want to consider . i am sure that the secretary of state will join me in praising local community groups , such as those in ayr , carrick and cumnock , that support people facing problems with gambling . at a time when financial resources are limited , and with a black hole left by the conservative government , have the new government considered the fiscal cost to society of gambling , and particularly online gambling , which has a higher risk of harm ? we are very aware of the issues that my hon . friend raises and would be pleased to discuss them with her , as part of ensuring that we have the most robust protections in place , particularly in relation to online gambling . we are acutely aware of the problems that can ensue from gambling , but we also know that this is an industry that brings joy to many people . for example , more than half of all adults have participated in some form of gambling over the past year . we know that we must grasp this thorny issue , and we are committed to working with her and other colleagues to get it right . the horseracing industry , which is a british success story , is dependent on income from responsible gambling . i was glad to hear what the secretary of state said about responsibly enjoying a flutter . this is nothing like some of the problem gambling that we see online , and the proportion of bets on horseracing that are deemed to be problematic is comparable to the proportion of problematic users of the national lottery . what plans does she have to reform the betting levy and the affordability checks that have been in train for some time ? i should tell the house that the tote is headquartered in my constituency of wigan , which gives me an insight into the industry , which i have had a relationship with for many years . there will be a debate on horseracing next thursday in westminster hall . this industry is worth £ 4 billion to the uk economy , so this government certainly take it incredibly seriously . baroness twycross is having discussions with representatives from across the industry , and i am sure that she would be delighted to discuss this with the hon . member as well . i call the shadow minister . no one wants to see people caught up in problem gambling , but equally , no one wants to see businesses struggle and jobs lost . as the secretary of state said , we want this industry to thrive , yet this week that was threatened after it was rumoured that the treasury is planning a £ 3 billion tax raid . that has already seen £ 3 billion wiped off the value of bookies . can the secretary of state clarify whether she supports the industry or the treasury ? did she raise her concerns about the rumour , and when will we see the gambling reforms brought forward with a timetable for scrutiny by this house ? i gently say to the hon . gentleman that he should know , as we do , that we can not believe everything we read in the papers . as he will have heard in my previous answer , we are determined to strike the right balance . as i said in answer to when she plans to launch a consultation on secondary ticketing and dynamic pricing . we want to put fans back at the heart of live events and we want to ensure that more of the revenues come to the creative industries . that is why we will be launching a consultation on the secondary ticket market soon — the piece of paper in front of me actually says “ in the autumn ” , but i am never quite sure when that is , so i am going with “ soon ” . i am grateful to the minister for his answer . i understand the need to look at secondary ticketing , but dynamic pricing is a contractual bargain between buyer and seller , based on supply and demand . it actually gives us cheaper tickets as well as more expensive ones . does he really want the government to get involved there ? i know that the prime minister wants everyone to be able to afford concert tickets , but what is wrong with the way that he gets them ? the truth is that dynamic pricing has many different forms and some of them are good . for instance , early bird tickets benefit many people , as does buying last - minute tickets for the theatre . we will not interfere with that , but we will have a call for evidence about how that works in relation to live events . on ticket pricing , the real scandal is that , for example , the face value of standing tickets for coldplay at wembley on i call bob blackman — not here . if she will make a statement on her departmental responsibilities . after 14 years , this government have opened the books to find a legacy of violent indifference and neglect of arts and culture that has created serious challenges for our proud creative industries . i am pleased to tell the house that the government ’s international investment summit this week put creative industries at the heart of our economic strategy . thanks to the support of partners such as netflix , universal music and tate , we were able to welcome £ 63 billion of investment into the uk . later today , in downing street , i will launch a new covenant with our civil society partners to reset what had become a needlessly antagonistic relationship under the last government . we look forward to working with those across the uk to help fulfil the country ’s enormous potential . the wigan & leigh short film festival , which took place last month , was once again extremely successful . it is a fantastic opportunity to gather like - minded creative individuals from the local area to celebrate and showcase up - and - coming talent from around the world . that is just one example of the enriched film and tv culture that is so vibrant in my constituency . i wholeheartedly welcome the government ’s announcement of tax reliefs to create jobs and boost our creative industries — order . topical questions are meant to be short and punchy , not a big , long question , jo . minister , can you pick the best out of that ? i completely agree with what my hon . friend was about to say . which part : the first three minutes or the second ? i call the shadow secretary of state . the secretary of state believes that it is not good policy that counts , but good vibes : the violent indifference that led to a booming creative sector is no longer ; the culture war is over ; and we , the vanquished , submit ourselves for re - education along with the rest of the public . the problem is that every dcms sector tells us that they want more than vibes ; they need decisions and they want a budget that will deliver . can she tell us whether she is among the panicked ministers who have written to the chancellor about the budget and their spending asks , and which has she listed as her priority ? i am not entirely sure what the “ vibes ” issue is , but i will say that i do not need to write to the chancellor . unlike under the previous government , we have a very close relationship and we tend to pick up the phone when discussions need to be had . alongside the chancellor , the secretary of state for business and trade and the prime minister , i was pleased this week to welcome £ 63 billion of investment into the uk to put creative industries at the heart of our economic strategy . i spoke to some of the dcms stakeholders who went to the investment summit , and they came away worried . they see a government who absolutely milk their stardust , but all they hear is new taxes , new employment regulations , other departments riding roughshod over dcms interests and delays to decisions . can the secretary of state be specific ? when she says that she is “ putting rocket boosters ” under the creative industries , what does that mean in practice ? as i announced to the house last week , it means introducing an independent film tax credit , which the previous government talked about for several months and did absolutely nothing about . i have to say to the hon . lady that after the legacy that her government left , which has brought our proud country to its knees , it takes some brass neck to stand at the dispatch box and criticise this government . we are fixing the problems that her government created , and a little bit of humility might go a long way . in march 1974 , a turkish airlines jet crashed while flying from paris to london . more than 400 people were killed . among them were 19 members of the bury st edmunds rugby club . it was the greatest disaster to befall the town in living memory . this year , 60 cyclists cycled from paris to bury st edmunds , raising £ 200,000 in their memory . will the secretary of state join me in congratulating these bold cyclists ? i thank my hon . friend for his important question . i congratulate the cyclists on completing their fantastic ride and on the impressive sum of money that they raised . i pay particular tribute to austin cornish , the organiser of the ride , whose father died in that crash . women are those most often criminalised for non - payment of the licence fee . the bbc charter review offers an opportunity for the government to look at this issue again . will the government consider decriminalising non - payment of the licence fee ? i thank the right hon . member for raising this important issue . i am deeply concerned by the number of cases that have been brought to my attention since taking office of women who have fallen foul of this practice . i have personally had discussions with the bbc leadership about that . obviously , the charter review , which we intend to start early next year , offers us an opportunity to look at these issues in the round . order . we are going to have to get through the questions more quickly . we do not have much time . i recently visited the fantastic shinfield studios in the constituency of my hon . friend the member for earley and woodley ( yuan yang ) and saw the huge value that our creative industries can bring to my constituents . will the minister please tell me what the inclusion of the creative industries in the industrial strategy and the huge investment delivered at the investment summit last week will deliver for my constituency and others like it ? it is great to see my hon . friend here . first , we want to ensure that more international movies and blockbusters are made in the uk , and we want to increase investment . with more sound stages , we should be able to challenge hollywood . i also want to ensure that every single child in this country can consider a career in the creative industries , whatever background they come from . i draw attention to my entry in the register of members ’ financial interests . eastbourne art galleries such as the towner and devonshire collective volt — it made the tie i am wearing — contribute so much to our town and to our country , but the sector faces serious financial pressures . will the minister meet me and a delegation of art galleries to discuss them ? i will happily meet the hon . member , who makes a very good point . we have hundreds of museums and galleries across the country . some of them receive funding directly from arts council england . we want to talk to arts council england about how we can ensure that there is more support for our museums and galleries . some of the funding comes directly from our department . i am happy to meet him to discuss that . i advise the house that my sister works for rugby league cares . the minister will know that my constituency is the birthplace of rugby league . at a professional and community level , the game is really important to towns such as mine , but it has not always had the support that it deserves . the rugby football league has produced a national community facilities strategy , which states the level of funding that is needed for the game . what steps is she taking to support long - term investment in rugby league ? we know just how important the work of the rugby football league is in communities — i have seen it at first hand , as i know you have , mr speaker . it is one of the reasons the rfl has received just under £ 1 million in funding from sport england over the past financial year to help tackle inequalities and improve access . i look forward to working with the sport in the months and years ahead . i look forward to the increase as well . when mobile providers started to turn off the 2 g and 3 g networks earlier this year , we were told that it would have no impact on existing services , but the experience in my constituency is the contrary , particularly along the m74 motorway network . will ministers investigate the impact of the switch - off to date , and ensure that necessary improvements are made so that we have a full network across the whole of the united kingdom ? i think this is a hangover from yesterday ’s questions on telecoms , but the right hon . member makes a very good point . one of the things that keeps me awake at night is worrying about what will happen to the transition for people with telecare devices , which rely on the old public switched telephone network . we are keen to have a safe transition . exactly the same issues apply to 2 g and 3g. i will happily meet with him , if that would help . in southend east and rochford , the freight house and the kursaal sit vacant . in times gone by , my community used those sites greatly . we can not allow buildings with such cultural capital potential to sit vacant . does the minister agree that the regeneration of cultural sites such as the kursaal and the freight house is central to a prosperous community ? i very much welcome the work that my hon . friend is doing to champion his community , and offer him the government ’s support for it . i am working with the secretary of state for housing , communities and local government ahead of the publication of our forthcoming devolution plans to ensure that we give communities the tools to bring our proud heritage sites back into use , and to repurpose them for future generations . i urge the secretary of state and the ministerial team to take account of the listed place of worship grant scheme , which is particularly valuable to many churches up and down the country , and to not allow the treasury to trim it back . it may expire at the end of march next year . the right hon . gentleman knows very well that spending review issues are a matter for the treasury — let us see what comes out of that review . i have had lots of representations , and he makes a good point . my beloved aston villa made their first appearance in the european cup for over 40 years this season , but fans faced ticket prices of £ 94 to see that first - in - a - generation moment . does the secretary of state agree that we need greater fan representation on football boards , so that football remains accessible to all ? i am pleased to offer my hon . friend our support on that . the football governance bill , which we intend to introduce shortly , will significantly advance the protection of fans . we are working with the widest range of partners , and we hope to command proper cross - party support , as the previous football governance bill did before the election . east devon district council is making available £ 207,000 for young people ’s sports facilities in honiton . how can central government contribute to that initiative ? we are pleased to have announced investment worth £ 123 million in grassroots sports facilities for the coming year . demand currently outstrips the pace at which such facilities can be created , but the government are absolutely determined to work with the hon . gentleman and partners across the house to ensure that we give our young people the facilities that they deserve . historic england recently announced a £ 750,000 commitment to rebuilding the beautiful victorian arches of madeira terrace in my constituency , which the minister for creative industries , arts and tourism visited with me during the election campaign . that commitment is welcome , but such projects are expensive and take time , so what can the secretary of state do to support heritage projects around the country , and will she come to brighton with me to see the work in progress ? i think my hon . friend may be getting me again . it is a great delight that the arches will be sorted , not least because we launched his election campaign at that very site . our heritage is a key reason why so many international visitors come to this country . if we can get the mix of historical and modern right , i am sure that we can challenge france for international visitor numbers . the hon . member for battersea , representing the church commissioners , was asked — what steps the church of england is taking to support parish life in small rural communities . with your indulgence , mr speaker , as this is my first time responding to questions , i would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor as second church estates commissioner , the former member for south west bedfordshire , andrew selous , for his work in the role . i certainly hope to do my best in it for parliamentarians and commissioners . turning to my hon . friend ’s question , the church of england operates 16,000 parish churches , over half of which are in rural areas , along with church schools . it provides the largest network of buildings in england that serve communities — buildings that are used for worship and education , as well as warm spaces and hubs for activities such as food banks , post offices , credit unions and other social and community initiatives . the parish of bewcastle in the north - east corner of my constituency is perhaps best known as the home of the bewcastle cross , probably the finest example of pre - norman carving in england . geographically , it is a very isolated community , but every single month , parishioners organise a vibrant community hub , which is critical in overcoming social isolation and loneliness . next month will mark 1,350 years since the carving of the cross , so will my hon . friend ask the church commissioners to consider additional funding for the parish to improve the village hall ? i congratulate all the volunteers in the parish of bewcastle on their work to tackle social isolation and loneliness . i will look into the specific case that my hon . friend mentions and see what advice can be given to support her . i also commend the work of the good shepherd multi - academy trust , which is in her constituency and supports children , families and communities to flourish . i welcome the second church estates commissioner to her place , and thank her for her answer to the previous question . as everyone knows , the purpose of any church is to tell the greatest story ever told — the story of the gospel of our lord jesus christ — but alongside that they have practical purposes , which as the hon . member highlights , there is so much that the church does by way of outreach in our communities . it also ensures that there is good infrastructure to protect all our communities , including children and young people . what steps the church is taking to support the development of housing on derelict former church sites . when a church is closed , a formal legal process under the mission and pastoral measure 2011 is followed . there are currently 127 cases in which a new use is being found for closed church buildings ; only two are cleared sites , and they are waiting for disposal . i welcome the hon . lady to her place . eastbourne declared a housing emergency last year , and the key thing we need to do to address that emergency is build our way out of it . the commissioners preside over a perfect brownfield site for housing : the site of the former st elisabeth ’s church on victoria drive , just down the road from where i went to school . it has been derelict for 20 years , and since the church on the site was demolished four years ago , there has been no sign of development whatsoever . i urge the commissioners to develop that site into affordable housing , and i appeal to the hon . lady for an urgent update on the situation . since 2022 , the church commissioners have been working with the diocese of chichester to market the site and find a developer . i am pleased to say that a developer is in the process of agreeing to a conditional contract for a mixed - use development that will include convenience retail and housing , some of which will be much - needed affordable housing , which the hon . member mentioned . that development will need planning permission , and that is being explored with the local authority now . what steps the church is taking with developers and local authorities to ensure that residents in new towns and villages have access to places of worship . local authorities are not currently required to consider the building of new places of worship , but under the national planning policy framework they are permitted to include places of worship among a range of community buildings in a development . where local authorities include places of worship among community buildings , the church commissioners seek to promote these facilities . development should be about building places and communities where people can live fulfilling lives , not just building houses , and places of worship play an important role in that . will the hon . member work with ministers to ensure that the government ’s new towns commission incorporates the creation of places of worship in new towns ? the church commissioners are very much invested in place - making ; it is at the core of their approach to bringing forward new homes for communities across the country . they have sought a meeting with my right hon . friend the secretary of state for housing , communities and local government to discuss the church ’s strategic land , and the potential to build up to 70,000 new homes . the diocese of st albans has several good examples of how the church is contributing to community - building in the mid bedfordshire constituency , and i will write to the hon . gentleman with further details . what steps the church has taken in response to the findings of sarah wilkinson ’s independent review into the independent safeguarding board . the general synod of the church of england considered the wilkinson review at its meeting in july 2024 . the synod has commissioned a detailed analysis of four options for the organisational structure of safeguarding independence . the intention is for them to be presented to the synod at the next meeting in february 2025 , which i hope to attend . i welcome my hon . friend to her role ; she is doing a fantastic job . my constituent has been involved in that process . can she help to secure a meeting with my constituent to discuss the findings and the work in more detail ? i will do whatever i can to secure a meeting . it is important to put on record that there has been much engagement with all the survivors , who have been involved throughout the process . i will certainly write to my hon . friend to see what we can do to ensure that a meeting is secured . what steps the church is taking to recognise the positive impact of individual members of the clergy in the communities they serve . i call marsha de cordova — you are earning your money today . i certainly am , and so are my thighs . at a national level , the contribution of local clergy and lay people is usually recognised through the archbishops ’ medals or a lambeth degree . most dioceses also have their own awards . clergy and lay volunteers are eligible for nomination to relevant orders , and for decorations and medals , and there are opportunities in the wider civil honours system where appropriate . i am grateful to the hon . lady for that answer . i am full of praise for the hard work and dedication of all our clergy , but sometimes an individual goes above and beyond . that is true of reverend canon david williams , who on christmas day will lead his last service at st mary ’s , princes risborough , after 15 years ’ service to that town and the surrounding villages . his work includes having supported thousands of children through lighthouse princes risborough , and his role as a trustee of the princes centre and other charities , including those supporting the homeless . will the hon . lady join me in thanking david and his wife jo for their 15 years ’ service to princes risborough ? what more can the church do to recognise his and others ’ hard work ? i place on record my thanks , congratulations and appreciation of reverend canon david williams and his wife — as we know , these things are always a partnership — for all their good work in the hon . gentleman ’s constituency . the diocese of oxford is thankful for the dedicated , pioneering and innovative work of the clergy and their great contribution to the church ’s ministry and mission , and to our local communities . i hope that the hon . gentleman will pass on my thanks , and that he will be present for the reverend ’s final service on christmas morning , to congratulate him in person . what progress the church has made on developing interfaith understanding . some 85 % of the global population have a faith that shapes their day - to - day life . the church has been working at a global , national and local level to improve interfaith understanding and engagement . at home , it engages with national and local networks to support faith and civic leaders , mayors and mps in building trust and resilience in their local communities , as they did during and after the most recent civil unrest . i welcome my hon . friend to her post ; she is doing a fine job . will she join me in congratulating the local faith communities across the diverse and tolerant town of reading on their work to support one another , and to understand one another ’s faith ? i associate myself with that tremendous work ; it is wonderful to see different faith communities working together for the whole community . i also put on record my support for the retiring bishop of reading , bishop olivia , and pay tribute to her for her outstanding work to tackle knife crime in our community . i join my hon . friend in congratulating all those working across all faiths to ensure that there is good , strong community cohesion , and i congratulate the retiring bishop . that is important across constituencies that , like reading , have diverse communities with diversity in faith . what steps the church is taking to mark the 30th anniversary of the ordination of women . what steps the church is taking to mark the 30th anniversary of the ordination of women . it is so important that we celebrate women who have been ordinated . i congratulate my hon . friend on the excellent job she is doing today , and on her appointment . i want to highlight one particular woman , bishop rose . in 2007 , she was appointed chaplain to her late majesty the queen , the first ever black female to hold that role . in 2010 , she was the first ever black female appointed as chaplain — the 79th chaplain — to the speaker of the house of commons . since 2019 , the right rev. rose hudson - wilkin has been the bishop of dover and the bishop in canterbury — britain ’s first ever black female bishop . will my hon . friend join me in honouring bishop rose ? i take great pleasure in honouring the great bishop rose . as we all know , it is black history month , so there is double cause to do so . the diocese of london marked the anniversary , and there have been several services marking it across the country , in which 180 women have gathered to share their experience of ministry over the past 30 years . we all know what a difference bishop rose made to this place , including to me personally when i first came here seven and a half years ago . i should also pay tribute to tricia hillas , the speaker ’s chaplain for a period of time , another great and amazing woman . i am so proud of the role that women are playing in the church . they are breaking down barriers and smashing those glass ceilings . long may that continue . i welcome my dear friend to her position , and i know she will be absolutely brilliant . i was thrilled to attend the 30 - year anniversary of the first women ordained at canterbury cathedral earlier this year . the service was conducted by our dear bishop rose , our much - loved former chaplain to the speaker . will my friend join me in congratulating those pioneering women , including my partner ’s mother , canon eileen routh , who faced a degree of hostility when entering into their new vocations some 30 years ago ? i thank my hon . friend for her question . i happily join her in congratulating the great bishop rose , but also in remembering all those women who faced hostility when starting out , including her future mother - in - law , canon eileen routh ; she faced a lot of hostility . as i say , there is still so much work to be done , but it is so important that we celebrate these achievements , because they will spur us forward to do even more . what estimate the church commissioners have made of levels of funding required to restore parish churches and cathedrals . churches and cathedrals are the treasure houses of our local culture and history . the church of england manages the largest single group of listed buildings in england — over 12,200 grade i and grade ii listed buildings . the value of the work needed to maintain these buildings is estimated at £ 115 million annually , and the backlog for church building repairs is approximately £ 1 billion . there are many places of worship in perilous condition , not just in england , but in scotland , wales and northern ireland , including in my constituency of west dunbartonshire . the listed places of worship grant scheme , introduced by former chancellor gordon brown in 2004 , is uk - wide . what efforts have the church commissioners made to ensure that the scheme is extended beyond march 2025 ? my hon . friend will know that the church does not receive any regular financial support from the state , and church buildings often rely on fundraising by local volunteers . the government ’s listed places of worship grant scheme is extremely helpful for all our faith communities with listed buildings across the uk , reimbursing the cost of vat spent on repairs to those listed churches . this year , more than 5,000 church of england buildings received support through the scheme . that is transformational for local communities , and enables work on the vital fabrics of those spaces . it is important that that funding scheme continues . the church has written to the treasury , along with others , and i hope that my hon . friends in the treasury will consider extending the scheme in the upcoming budget later this month . i welcome the hon . lady to her new role , and i associate myself with her tribute to her predecessor . in recent times , the late noble lord cormack in the other place convened a meeting of mps from cathedral cities and their deans , and there are plans to resurrect that meeting . will the hon . lady meet me to discuss how we can support her with plans to lobby the treasury for capital grants for our great english cathedrals , including salisbury , to maintain their presence in our country ? yes , i am very happy to meet the right hon . gentleman . the hon . member for blaenau gwent and rhymney , representing the house of commons commission , was asked — whether the commission is taking steps to increase access to period products on the parliamentary estate . may i say how glad i am to give my hon . friend i thank my hon . friend may i say how glad i am to be asking this question today , so that my hon . friend can also earn his pay ? free period products in the workplace are essential items , but in far too many places of work they are seen as optional . i know there are a few places around the parliamentary estate where free period products can be accessed , but more places are required and we can not leave out our constituency offices . will he ensure that more period products are made available both here and in constituency offices around the country ? my hon . friend makes a great point . the house service was asked a year ago to provide period products for emergency use , and it engages with groups , such as our workplace equality networks , to ensure accessible products throughout our house . on constituency offices , as members of parliament we are responsible for our staff , and away from this estate i would expect a member , as an employer , to decide on what provision to arrange for their teams . however , i am happy to take that point back to the administration committee for further consideration of take - up and distribution , and i will contact my hon . friend in good time on the matter . what recent progress has been made on the restoration and renewal programme . earlier this year , the restoration and renewal client board published the strategic case for the r and r programme , which sets out how to deliver the r and r works that will be developed in detail over the next year . this detailed work , which will include robust cost , timescale and risk estimates for all three options , is expected to be presented to the house in 2025 to enable an evidence - based decision on how best to restore our lovely palace . it feels a bit like groundhog day — we have been talking about restoration and renewal for 40 years . bits are falling off the building , there are leaks in every office i have had in this building and in each part of the estate , and we all know the problems of asbestos and the issues in the basement . my hon . friend has given me the timetable , but can he say that he will champion this issue , and that we will finally get to a resolution before a catastrophic event in this place destroys this world heritage site ? i know that my hon . friend has been an advocate for this programme for many years . together , as members of the public accounts committee , we sought safety for all of us here on the estate , the modernisation of our facilities and value for money . detailed designs are being developed and surveys continue . the work of the r and r programme has been continuing at pace over the past six months , following the work of the client board and the programme board . we will work together on this . i apologise for not being here earlier . can the hon . gentleman confirm that we are spending more than £ 1 million a month on just the maintenance of this palace ? the long delay — there is no reason for it — over making these decisions lengthens the process and leads to the taxpayer paying more money , and it is leading to more degradation of this palace as we sit here . the hon . member is right about the importance of moving faster and reducing costs on this important programme . i do not know the detailed answer to the question he asks , but i will get back to him . the hon . member for battersea , representing the church commissioners , was asked — what steps the church is taking to help ensure that people can contact and communicate with the leaders of their dioceses . my hon . friend ’s constituency is under the jurisdiction of the diocese of coventry , and there is currently a vacancy for the diocesan bishop . however , all the contact details for the bishop ’s office , diocesan staff and cathedral staff are found on the website . contact details for local clergy are also available on the website a church near you . i thank my hon . friend for their response and welcome them to their new role , in which they are doing a brilliant job . constituents in nuneaton have raised concerns about finding available burial plots . given the recent consultation from the law commission , can my hon . friend please update the house on proposals to increase burial capacity in england ? the church of england contributed to the proposals developed by the law commission , and they have developed those proposals sensitively to address the complex questions around burial and cremation law . all sides recognise the growing need and the pressure for burial space , and the challenges facing burial grounds and maintenance . reusing grave spaces in churchyards in some circumstances is a long - standing and lawful practice in the church of england , ensuring that existing remains are left undisturbed . however , some churchyards are declared full and are closed by law . they are unable to be reopened for new burials . will the leader of the house give us the forthcoming business ? the business for next week is as follows : the provisional business for the week commencing the provisional business for the week commencing the house will rise for the november recess at the conclusion of business on may i start by paying tribute to alex salmond , a substantial figure in our politics and personally always very popular across the house ? we will all miss him . we also fondly remember sir david amess , whose crest is on the wall opposite me , and who was cruelly murdered three years ago this week . sir david and his family will remain forever in our thoughts and prayers . i congratulate colleagues who introduced bills yesterday . the bill on terminally ill adults has attracted particular interest . getting the details right will be critical . if the bill proceeds , will the government commit to providing the time needed in committee and on report for full debate and votes ? we have just heard that the budget will be delivered in 13 days ’ time . there was not much enthusiasm from labour members when the leader of the house announced that — i can not imagine why . labour solemnly pledged in its manifesto that it would not raise national insurance , so raising employer ’s ni would break that promise , as well as hitting working people and destroying jobs . but hon . members should not just take my word for it . paul johnson of the independent institute for fiscal studies said that labour ’s ni plan is “ a straightforward breach ” of its manifesto commitment . the federation of small businesses said it would be “ a clear manifesto breach ” and will “ hit working people ” . ukhospitality said it is “ a tax on jobs ” . the british chambers of commerce said it will “ hobble growth and lead to … less money to invest ” in workers . the institute of directors called it “ a poll tax on business ” and said that “ the costs will be borne by workers . ” my final witness is rachel , from leeds , who apparently used to work briefly at the bank of england . in 2021 , the chancellor herself admitted that a rise in employers ’ national insurance is , in fact , in her words , a “ tax on working people ” . now , labour members could have been honest in the election and made the argument for the increase , but they were not honest ; they pretended that they had no intention of increasing ni , to trick people into voting for them . however , this is not just about labour ’s election dishonesty . in a radio 5 live phone - in yesterday , i spoke to a man who is closing down his business and leaving the country because of the high taxes and increased regulation proposed by this government . another man phoned in to say he was closing down too . this government are driving businesses to close and making successful people leave the country . their policies will destroy jobs and reduce the amount of tax collected . i say to them sincerely that there is time in the next 13 days to stop and think again . i appeal directly to labour back benchers , whom the prime minister is more likely to listen to than me , to please appeal to their prime minister to think again . otherwise , his personal poll ratings — already minus 36%—are likely to plummet further . speaking of the prime minister , will the leader of the house arrange a statement on the special police escort for taylor swift ? it is reported that the police decided initially that no special escort was needed . apparently , the home secretary , the attorney general , the mayor of london and , inevitably , sue gray then pressured the police into changing their mind and providing one , violating the police ’s operational independence . we now know that among the many freebies that the prime minister has eagerly scrounged for himself were tickets and a backstage pass to that very concert . and it was not just him : the home secretary , the science secretary , the culture secretary , the health secretary , the education secretary , the chief secretary to the treasury , the minister for school standards and the prime minister ’s parliamentary private secretary all had free tickets too . what were they doing ? having a cabinet meeting at the concert ? does the leader of the house understand how bad this looks ? the government initially denied that the met was pressured , which now appears to be untrue . will the government finally come clean and tell the truth about exactly what pressure was put on the met and by whom ? finally , will the leader of the house arrange a debate on illegal immigration and asylum accommodation ? it emerged this week that the government are seeking even more hotels , at huge expense , to cater for the large number of illegal arrivals . over 13,000 illegal immigrants have crossed the channel by small boat since the election . the government must now regret cancelling the rwanda scheme before it had even started . the deterrent effect would by now have kicked in . we have seen the same approach work in australia . we have seen the deterrent effect work with returns to albania . even the european commission is now looking at a rwanda - style scheme . will the right hon . lady therefore consider reinstating the scheme , given that the european commission itself is now looking at it ? and why have the government closed the bibby stockholm , leaving them instead frantically renting expensive hotels ? the government are failing on illegal immigration . the country and the house need answers . order . shadow leader of the house , you get five minutes . please do not take advantage . if you have good points to make , please make them earlier . i join the shadow leader of the house in paying tribute to alex salmond , a great parliamentarian who has sadly passed away . i also pay tribute to the late sir david amess , as this week marks three years since his awful murder . we still miss him greatly in this house . i also send condolences to the friends and family of liam payne . one direction was loved by millions across the world , and this was a tragic end for someone so young . i would like to draw the house ’s attention to the modernisation committee ’s call for views on its future work , which has been published this morning . i am hoping to hear many views , and i thank the shadow leader of the house and other committee members for their constructive engagement so far . as the right hon . gentleman mentioned , the private member ’s bills were presented yesterday . i know that many colleagues want to ensure that proper time and consideration are given to the important matter of assisted dying . as a member of this house who was present last time we considered this issue , i know that these debates of conscience bring out the very best of parliament in respectful and considered debate . i am sure that we all welcome this week ’s news that inflation is now lower than the bank of england ’s target , for the first time in three years . after so much political instability , economic turbulence and rising bills , it will be a huge relief for families . but it is just the first step in securing the economy . given the state of the public finances we inherited , there is a long road ahead . the conservatives do not like to hear it , but they left the country ’s finances in a very sorry state . they ducked the decisions on things that they knew would explode after the election , and were grossly irresponsible : pay deals left on ministers ’ desks with no money allocated ; this year ’s pay rise for teachers not funded , and last year ’s not either ; a hospital building programme that was a work of fiction , not worth the paper it was written on ; out - of - control expenditure in departments , like the billions spent on asylum hotels ; reserves for this financial year spent three times over ; waiting lists at a record high , with industrial action ripping through the nhs ; and prisons on the verge of collapse . it was a government who knew they were about to lose , and left us to pick up the pieces . this is not about not just the £ 22 billion black hole that we have now ; it is a black hole year after year . doing nothing is not an option . if we do not deal with it , markets lose confidence and the cost of borrowing goes up . we saw two years ago what happens , did not we not ? the poorest in society pay the highest price when the economy tanks . we are all still paying higher mortgages and higher costs after what the shadow leader of the house did when he was the chief secretary of the treasury in liz truss ’s cabinet . i will not be discussing the measures that may or may not be in the budget . the chancellor is working night and day to deliver economic stability . we stand by all our manifesto commitments , and we know that we need to live within our means . i have said it once and i will say it again : i will not take the right hon . gentleman ’s advice on economic stability , if he does not mind . the right hon . gentleman raised the taylor swift concerts , inevitably . let me say to this house [ interruption . ] no , i was not there . the concerts generated £ 1 billion for the uk visitor economy this summer . surely people welcome that . i know that he is interested in quoting other people ; he might want to read what the conservative peer andrew lloyd webber said in the times today : the continued attention on this concert by the conservatives is “ ludicrous ” . it is about time they “ shake it off ” , quite honestly — someone had to get it in . the right hon . gentleman raised the rwanda scheme . frankly , more home secretaries from his government went to rwanda than illegal migrants . we are fixing the mess that the conservatives left behind , as we are across all policy areas . we are restoring confidence and governing for the long term . just this week , our investment summit attracted record private sector investment — twice as much as was attracted by the same conference under his watch last year . businesses are coming to britain ; a vote of confidence in labour ’s handling of the economy , turning the page on the instability and infighting that happened in the past . just this week , we have gone further : we have published our industrial strategy ; unlocked thousands of new homes on brownfield sites ; kept our promise to veterans on voter id ; tackled spiralling car insurance costs ; taken our first steps on martyn ’s law and on removing hereditary peers , which conservative members were against ; published our employment rights bill ; taken action on carer ’s allowance overpayments ; increased independent film tax credits ; and , today , opened funding applications for school - based nurseries . that is the difference that just one week of a labour government can make , unlike the tories . this weekend , i had the great and fun privilege of attending the windrush celebration at all saints church in my constituency . it was as much a discussion as a celebration . will the leader of the house provide either a government statement or government time for a debate on the windrush compensation scheme and the improvements that will hopefully be made under this government ? i thank my hon . friend for that question ; she is absolutely right . the scandal of the windrush generation still scars our country . those injustices are being furthered by the delays to the compensation scheme , which this government are taking quick action to put right , . i am sure she could raise these matters in home office questions next week . i thank the leader of the house for the helpful clarity she has provided in giving notice of three weeks ’ worth of business . we very much hope that this is how she intends to continue going forward . i also join her in sending my condolences to the family of liam payne , who has passed away so tragically . it was with enormous sadness that i learned just two days ago of a horrific murder committed in broad daylight in a residential area of my chelmsford constituency . i am sure the whole house will want to join me in sending condolences to the victim ’s grieving family at this terrible time . as essex police are now conducting an ongoing major incident investigation , i can not comment much further on the specifics , except to say that i understand that this was a vicious attack with three male suspects spotted leaving the scene wearing balaclavas . i encourage members of the public who have any information to get in touch with essex police . my thoughts also go out to the brave police , paramedics and other first responders who have to attend such awful scenes across the entire country . i thank them for the incredible work they do and send them assurances from the liberal democrat benches that we have their backs . we will never stop campaigning for the funding and resources they need to support them , which the previous government did not prioritise , leading to the grave issues we see now in our beloved nhs and other emergency services . finally , lake windermere is england ’s largest lake . its beauty is internationally renowned . it is home to countless species of wildlife and surrounding habitats , and it is a haven for swimmers and water sports enthusiasts . it is therefore shocking to read the bbc revelations that north - west water company , united utilities , spent three years spewing over 100 million litres of raw sewage into lake windermere . the failures of united utilities are clear for all to see , unlike the water it is polluting . will the leader of the house grant a debate in government time to discuss the ongoing appalling behaviour of water companies ? i see trying to give the house as much forward business and as many recess dates as possible in order to provide certainty as a key performance indicator , and i thank the hon . lady for her comments in that regard . i am very sorry to hear about the murder in the hon . lady ’s constituency , and i join her in thanking all the services — the police , the nhs and others — that do such an amazing job when it comes to these awful incidents . the hon . lady rightly raised the truly appalling scandal of discharges into windermere . as a northerner , i am a frequent visitor to the lake district , and i am aware of its beauty and its importance not only as a tourist attraction but as a habitat for wildlife . the government have taken rapid action in dealing with our water bosses and cleaning up our waterways . in his first week in the job , the environment secretary ringfenced infrastructure spending and empowered customers to hold bosses to account , and the water ( special measures ) bill is currently in the house of lords and will come to this house soon . however , that is not all we have done : we have also launched a full review of water reform to ensure that we have the governance right and can take appropriate action , including sanctions , to prevent these discharges from happening again . i welcomed the introduction of the renters ’ rights bill last week , but many more of my constituents are social housing tenants than are private renters , and they are living in seriously overcrowded conditions , often with damp and mould . this is not always entirely the fault of the landlord , but the conditions in which people are living exacerbate existing problems . will the leader of the house grant us a debate in government time about the real need for investment in social housing , which , according to the government ’s own figures , is the best value for money for the taxpayer and prevents health and other problems ? my hon . friend is right : in recent years this country has had a woeful record of building and creating social homes , which is fundamental for many people . i was struck by what the deputy prime minister said once — that she had grown up in a council house , which at the time was seen as impoverishment , whereas today it is considered a privilege to get a council house . the government are committed to building 1.5 million new homes , a great many of which will be new social and council housing . i call the chair of the backbench business committee . i look forward to meeting the leader of the house next week to discuss the committee ’s work . i have encouraged parties on both sides of the house to ensure that we get the names in so that we can get the committee up and running , but given that we are not up and running yet , may i make a suggestion for the general debate on many of my jewish constituents enjoy playing golf at hendon golf club . recently , during yom kippur , the most abhorrent antisemitic statements were raked into the bunkers . that is under police investigation , but may we have a debate on i look forward to meeting the hon . gentleman next week , and to working closely with him as the backbench business committee gets under way in the coming weeks . i am extremely sorry to hear about the antisemitic attacks at hendon golf club , especially as they took place during yom kippur . that really is something that we need to end in this country , and we must continue to speak up about it , as the hon . gentleman frequently does in the house . he has made a very good suggestion for a debate , and i shall certainly speak to the chief whip and others about it . many of my constituents face serious problems with antisocial behaviour and crime of various types . the government are taking renewed action to tackle those problems , and i was pleased to hear some of the announcements from the new home secretary . would the leader of the house be able to arrange a debate in government time on this very important matter ? i thank my hon . friend for raising that issue . crime and antisocial behaviour blights many communities and is frequently raised at business questions by the members that represent those communities . that is why we are taking action to create more neighbourhood police , as well as bringing in respect orders and other actions to tackle antisocial behaviour . home office questions is next week and he may want to raise the issue then as well . i reassure the leader of the house that some of us feel that nothing is too good for the marvellous taylor swift , including , where appropriate , a police escort for her “ getaway car ” . however , there can be no doubt that the terrorism threat is intensifying . can we have a statement , as soon as possible , on the reports in today ’s media about the possibility that russia is behind an incendiary device that was flown in on a plane to the united kingdom , but fortunately did not ignite until it was in a warehouse in birmingham ? we have seen many of those reports , and we heard from the head of the security services , in a key speech he gave last week , about some of the threats that our amazing security services thwart , which we often do not know about . home office questions is next week , but if the right hon . gentleman does not get the answers he wants , i will encourage the home secretary to consider giving us a security update . i refer the house to my declaration in the register of members ’ interests . many former miners who suffer from acute respiratory diseases are applying to the department for work and pensions for compensation , but the default response is that the process takes 16 weeks . that is totally unacceptable for people with such conditions . can we have a debate in government time to discuss and investigate why the dwp is taking so long to ensure that there is justice for people who suffer from such conditions because of their occupation ? i thank my hon . friend for raising this important matter ; i know he has raised it many times in the house . many of the compensation schemes that we , as a government , have inherited are still taking far too long . i will raise the matters he talked about with the dwp on his behalf . the subject would make a good topic for debate in the future . the labour and conservative parties are getting down to the business of deciding who should serve on select committees . that is an important task and good luck to those who get those jobs . however , one group is effectively excluded from participating in cross - party scrutiny in this parliament : members of the smaller parties of this house . for the first time since select committees were established , there is no place for members of any of the smaller parties , except if the government gift us a place through their largesse and generosity . we are effectively barred from participating in select committees . how can that be right or acceptable ? i thank the hon . gentleman for raising the issue . as i hope he is aware , there is a long - established convention and practice that the smaller parties have representation on committees , especially members from the devolved nations on their relative select committee . that process is still ongoing . some names are mentioned on the order paper today , but they only relate to some of the places that are to be allocated . those conversations are continuing through the usual channels . it is my understanding that there will be places available on some of those committees for members of the scottish national party and some of the other smaller parties . will the leader of the house arrange for a debate about how we can build more social housing and improve accommodation for homeless people ? she is aware that there is a homeless hostel in my constituency called bevin court . st anne ’s community services would like to improve and renovate the hostel , and pay for that by selling off some of the land and building social housing on it , which would require a change in the covenant by government . lawyers have spent 12 months arguing about this and got nowhere . i wrote to ministers in the department for levelling up , housing and communities in the previous government , but the matter was passed on to the ministry of justice . in this parliament , i have written to the ministry of justice but it has been passed back to the housing minister . will the leader of the house intervene to try to get this important project off the ground , and simply get the change of covenant that the organisation is asking for ? my hon . friend raises a really important matter , and it sounds like that project is vital for creating more social homes in his constituency of sheffield south east . i am really sorry to hear that he has been passed from pillar to post by different departments , and this is exactly the sort of issue to raise in business questions . i expect members to receive timely and helpful responses from ministers , and i will raise the issue with the relevant departments as soon as i leave the chamber . the labour manifesto contained a pledge to recognise palestine . subsequently , the prime minister has said that the palestinians have an “ undeniable right ” to recognition , but something is holding him back . could we please have a debate in government time to examine the fact that all our arab allies are saying that recognition is now a prerequisite for peace in the middle east , so that the house can vote to support the prime minister in taking this very significant step ? we absolutely do support recognising palestine as a state , which is an indelible right of the palestinian people . it is absolutely critical that we achieve a long - term , two - state solution in the middle east that recognises both israel ’s right to exist as a safe and secure country , and the palestinian people ’s right to have a palestinian state that is also safe , secure and free . that is what we are working towards internationally and with our allies across the world , and it is something that i know the foreign secretary and the prime minister spend a lot of their time dealing with . we have foreign office questions coming up next week , and i know that the foreign secretary is keen to come to this house as often as possible to update members on what is happening in the middle east . i am sure these issues will be debated further . this week is flood action week . in calder valley , where we have had several major floods in the last 15 years , my constituents are all too aware of flooding and its impact ; indeed , we have spent much of the last few days under a flood alert . although yorkshire water has been active in supporting anti - flooding measures , could we have a debate in government time on how regulation could be used to ensure that flood prevention is part of the statutory role of water companies ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . the issues of flood resilience and flood preparedness get raised in this session frequently , and i anticipate that as we get towards the winter months , when flooding becomes more frequent , they will be raised more often . we have launched our flood resilience taskforce to turbocharge the delivery and co - ordination of flood defences , but this issue would make a very good topic for a back - bench business debate or another debate . no one in this house was among those who went to the south pacific in the 1950s and ’ 60s to witness the first nuclear tests , but some of us have met the old men who did so as young men , unknowing of the dangers they faced . after a very long campaign , the former prime minister boris johnson agreed that those men should be granted service medals , and the current secretary of state for defence has agreed that the eligibility criteria should be widened because many of the people who went have not got their medals . given that the prime minister , i thank the right hon . gentleman for raising this important matter . i have followed the issue of nuclear test veterans closely , and i know that it has been raised in this house many times . a recent documentary shone a light on these issues as well . i will certainly raise this matter with the ministry of defence , and we have defence questions coming up soon . i will ask the mod to come to the house and give us an update . last week i had the great privilege of visiting high spen primary school and ryton junior school in my constituency , which have been working with local artists on projects supported by historic england . high spen school has launched a mural celebrating local women heroes in its former category d village , while ryton has created an online game commemorating the lost village of addison , another category d village . can we have a debate in government time to discuss the importance of our young people learning about their local history and the creative arts ? that sounds like a great project by schools in my hon . friend ’s constituency , and i am sure they will be pleased that she has raised it in the commons this morning . engaging young people in the cultural , industrial and other aspects of the history of their local area is really important . she might want to raise that at education questions , which are coming up soon . nearly half a million british pensioners across the globe had the level of their pensions frozen when they left the country . that includes 99 - year - old anne puckeridge , a decorated world war two veteran who did not leave this country for canada until she was 76 . despite having paid a lifetime of national insurance contributions , she has seen her pension diminish every year . ironically , this mostly affects pensioners who have gone to commonwealth countries , because people who go to the european union or the united states , for example , get the uplift each year . can we have a statement from the pensions minister on what the government intend to do about this ? will the leader of the house arrange a meeting with the government for me and others who will be meeting anne when she comes to this country in december to celebrate her 100th birthday ? i congratulate anne on her forthcoming 100th birthday , and i thank the hon . lady for raising this matter . i am happy to try to facilitate a meeting for her with the relevant minister . she will know that the policy on the uprating of uk state pensions paid overseas is of long standing . a key plank of it is that uprating is a reciprocal arrangement . however , i will definitely arrange a meeting for her , if that is helpful . will the leader of the house make time for the house to debate , celebrate and accelerate the roll out of life - saving defibrillators across the uk ? as part of that debate , we could discuss the growing campaign to remove vat from defibrillators so that the money raised by voluntary organisations in many of our constituencies might go a little further . finally , will the leader of the house join me in congratulating mary montague , the indefatigable provost of east renfrewshire who has turned personal tragedy into a determination that defibrillators should be available to everyone who needs them in their time of crisis ? my hon . friend describes a very good local campaign , led by his provost and others , to get defibrillators into local communities . all of us can relate to the importance of having defibrillators available in our communities . he will know that vat relief applies to defibrillators purchased by local authorities , the nhs and certain charities . i will ensure that the relevant minister has heard his call for that vat relief to be extended . earlier this week , i met the representative of a business that is proposing a carbon capture project in my constituency . they stressed the importance of having a decision from the secretary of state by the end of this year . will the leader of the house arrange for the secretary of state to come to the house with a statement on the next stage of these projects ? the hon . gentleman will know that the secretary of state recently updated the house on the huge investment the government are putting into this new carbon capture technology , and on where some of that investment will be going . i know the secretary of state has been expediting decisions to ensure that businesses such as the one that the hon . gentleman describes can benefit from that announcement . i will ensure that the secretary of state has heard what the hon . gentleman said and returns to this house when he has a further update . pie factory music in ramsgate , in my constituency , serves more than 1,000 young people across east kent , many of whom are in care or are young asylum seekers , refugees or struggling with ill health . unfortunately , conservative - run kent county council has slashed support for pie factory music and now wants to sell the building , preventing access to a safe , dedicated space for these young people . i am aware that our labour government are committed to a new network of youth hubs . in that light , will my right hon . friend provide government time for a debate on the importance of youth services , particularly in building resilience , tackling mental health issues and enabling young people to thrive ? my hon . friend is a great advocate for these issues in ramsgate and east thanet and has raised them with me before . i am sorry to hear about the fate of pie factory and its work . we understand the difficulties that local authorities and others are under , but we are launching a new young futures programme , which i hope will support facilities like pie factory ’s in future . i will certainly consider my hon . friend ’s request for a debate on youth services . this week is flood action week , an important opportunity to raise awareness of this crucial issue . this week , sadly , north herefordshire has been subject to flooding : roads are closed , schools are closed and soil is washing off the fields into the roads and rivers . unfortunately , climate change is making these events more frequent and more extreme . does the leader of the house agree that farmers are crucial partners in tackling flooding through natural flood management ? will she make time for a debate in government time on the crucial issue of flood prevention and action ? the hon . lady raises an important matter that has already been raised today . she and other colleagues are making a very good case for a debate on flood resilience and flood action . she is right to say that climate change is having a profound effect on those issues , which is why the government are committed to becoming a clean energy superpower by 2030 . i am sorry to hear about what is happening in her constituency ; i have already taken note of the early calls for a debate . each year , 300,000 people come to cleethorpes for our armed forces day . can the leader of the house advise me how i can best communicate to the ministry of defence how much we would appreciate it if national armed forces day in 2026 could be held in cleethorpes ? it will be the 10 - year anniversary of the last time it was held there ; perhaps we could extend armed forces day to start at the wonderful but somewhat overlooked north prom . i did not know that so many people come to cleethorpes for armed forces day — it sounds like a real occasion . i will certainly make sure that the ministry of defence hears my hon . friend ’s plea . cleethorpes sounds like a very good place for national armed forces day in 2026 . the leader of the house may be aware that the deputy prime minister has called in a planning application for the marlow film studio , which had already been rejected by thousands of local residents , planning officers and the council . this is the wrong development in the wrong place , so will the leader of the house allow a debate in government time on how the views of local people on planning can be retained before the labour party concretes over the entire green belt ? i am sorry , but i disagree with the hon . lady ’s characterisation . this government are unashamedly pro - house building and pro - cutting the red tape that stands in the way of business and business investment in our creative industries , our technologies and our transport , but we are absolutely on the side of local people as well , which is why our planning reforms put local voice and local plans at their centre . we have had debates on the issue , and i am sure that we will have many more in the coming weeks . is the leader of the house , like me , very concerned about the trend of bank closures on our local high streets , including in my constituency ? recently , residents and local businesses received the disappointing news that lloyds bank is leaving shirley high street ; i am campaigning to save the branch . does the leader of the house agree that face - to - face banking is a vital part of our thriving high streets ? it is essential for those with specific disabilities , for those who are digitally excluded , and particularly for the elderly . does she welcome the government ’s plans for banking hubs ? will she allow time to debate banking on our high streets ? that important issue is raised very frequently . access to cash and financial services for our local community has been on the decline and is a real matter of concern . that is why we have committed to accelerating the roll - out of at least 350 banking hubs , so that people have access to cash and wider banking services . more than 80 are already open , and we expect another 100 to follow . i shall certainly arrange for the house to be updated on any progress in that area . rose — order . if we can keep questions short , i will do my best to get everybody in . blue - light escort decisions are rightly taken on an operationally independent basis by the police . yet after the home secretary , the attorney general and the mayor of london met the police to discuss the escort for taylor swift , she was granted one . a few days later , the prime minister and his whole family met taylor swift and her manager back stage . can we have a debate on the new government ’s approach to breaches of the ministerial code ? i am sorry , but i totally reject the hon . lady ’s characterisation of what has happened here . as she rightly points out , these issues are taken operationally by the police , which is absolutely right . as i said earlier , it is estimated that the taylor swift concerts have brought £ 1 billion into the uk economy . we should be attracting these kind of events and enabling them to happen . she will know that taylor swift was subject to a very serious threat to her safety only a few days before coming to the uk . i should not really have to remind the hon . lady of this , but she will also be aware that taylor swift took a very close interest in what happened to those young girls in southport who were at a taylor swift event when they were tragically murdered . the prime minister rightly wanted to thank her for all that she had done to support the families . rose — order . long responses from the leader of the house will mean that fewer colleagues will be able to get in . i have received a great deal of correspondence regarding the assisted dying bill . i welcome the fact that back benchers will have a free vote . however , an issue as complex as this requires detailed scrutiny . as it stands , i am worried that colleagues will not have enough time to properly debate the bill . will the leader of the house relay the concerns shared by many across the house that the assisted dying bill should receive government time over several days , so that we can do it justice ? this issue gets raised a lot . my hon . friend is absolutely right . this is a matter of conscience . the government ’s position is neutral , so members have a free vote on the issues , and that is absolutely as it should be . the bill will be given its second reading on the leader of the house will be familiar with the uk health security agency ’s significant presence at porton down in my constituency , adjacent to the site of the defence science and technology laboratory . can we have a statement from the secretary of state for health and social care on the new government ’s future plans for porton down ? after the vaccine roll - out and all the work that was done there , things have changed since previous announcements were made . many of my constituents are concerned and need clarity on this matter . i am applying for an adjournment debate , but i would welcome a statement as well because the matter is urgent . i shall certainly make sure that the right hon . member ’s question is heard by the secretary of state . i do understand why he wants some clarity on the matter . i hope that he is successful in securing an adjournment debate where he will get a ministerial response , but i am happy to consider other ways for him to get answers . last week , i had the opportunity to visit tmt first , a business in newcastle - under - lyme . it delivers technology lifecycle services for the circular economy , specialises in the repair , refurbishment and recycling of mobile technology , and processes more than 250,000 devices every year . but with the mountain of electrical waste estimated to grow to 74 million tonnes a year by 2030 , we need to act and act fast . i invite the leader of the house to visit tmt first in newcastle - under - lyme , as it is on her way home . more importantly , can we have a debate on how we can support our businesses to do more recycling and repairing of things , rather than simply replacing them ? our economy and environment need that . i may well get off the train on my way home at some stage and visit my hon . friend ’s constituency . i know that supporting and enhancing the circular economy is a key priority for the secretary of state for environment , food and rural affairs . departmental questions are next month , but i will make sure my hon . friend gets a good reply . can government time be given for a debate on how to strengthen the environment agency ’s powers to ensure that operators of energy - from - waste facilities are forced to address exceedances and reduce overall emissions , and to look at the possibility of mandating carbon capture , usage and storage technology to mitigate the emissions produced from burning waste ? i point to the register of members ’ financial interests as regards my role as a councillor in sutton , as this challenge comes around often when we are looking to hold the operators to account . the hon . gentleman raises an important issue , which i know has had some attention recently . i have one of those waste facilities in my constituency , so i am well aware of the impact on and some of the challenges for the local community . i will certainly make sure that the secretary of state has heard the hon . gentleman ’s question , but he may want to raise it in defra questions on the combination of the cost of living crisis and the mental health crisis has led to a worrying increase in ketamine usage in my constituency . some young people are now facing a lifetime with an urostomy bag due to ketamine bladder syndrome . good work is being done by local charities such as horizon , but those services deserve more support . can the leader of the house make time for a debate on how the government can support long - term harm reduction in blackpool south ? as ever , my hon . friend raises an issue that is important to his constituency . drug misuse and the rise in the use of ketamine and other substances is an issue of real importance , and it costs society greatly . i will make sure that the home secretary has heard his calls today — departmental questions are next week , if he wants to raise the matter then . we have had many important debates and statements about the post office horizon scandal , but can the leader of the house bring forward a debate in government time about the future of the post office ? in my constituency , we are struggling to recruit new postmasters to take over post offices in communities such as eastriggs and langholm , and in west linton , where we currently have a post office , there does not seem to be any available support for it to continue . this matter gets raised in business questions and elsewhere quite often because we are seeing too many closures and too many post offices struggling . i think the subject would make a popular application for a backbench business debate , and i encourage him to take that forward . last week , buckinghamshire council confirmed the demolition of the gala bingo hall , a former live music venue and cinema on aylesbury high street . our town has a proud musical and cultural history and many residents are concerned that not enough effort was made to preserve this historic site . will the leader of the house allow time to debate the importance of recognising and preserving our historical and cultural assets as we regenerate our town centres ? music venues , cultural assets and leisure services are vital to our town centre regeneration , and our high street accelerators programme will be looking at grassroots venues . i encourage my hon . friend to raise these issues in housing , communities and local government questions in a couple of weeks . i was contacted this week by a resident of sidmouth whose parent was interned in a japanese camp during world war two . she wrote to me about her father ’s affidavits , which are held by the imperial war museum , saying , “ they do not make good reading , but bear great similarity to what is happening in gaza . ” will the government make a statement about their stance on whether israel ’s far - right ministers smotrich and ben - givr should be subject to uk government sanctions ? also , will they offer support to the international criminal court as it seeks arrest warrants for the likes of netanyahu and hamas leader yahya sinwar ? the comments made by the israeli ministers , as the prime minister said yesterday , were “ abhorrent ” ; disgraceful and unacceptable language was used . we are working closely with our allies internationally to bring an end to the horrors we are seeing in israel and gaza , which is why we need to make sure that everybody operates within international law . the government are committed to that and to bringing about an immediate ceasefire so we can work towards a long - term solution . a constituent in hethersett sadly lost her 17 - week - old puppy mini to the deadly parvovirus . this devastating disease takes animals ’ lives very quickly , but can be held at bay by vaccination . may we have a debate in government time on the importance of people vaccinating their pet dog , and on the responsibilities of good owners ? my hon . friend raises an important issue . i am sure that his question will help bring attention to the importance of people getting their dogs vaccinated ; i was unaware of the virus . i am sure that it would make a good topic for an adjournment debate , and he has rightly raised it on the floor of the house . cafés are so important to rural communities in hinckley and bosworth and north west leicestershire . i ran a favourite café competition , and a thousand constituents nominated cafés . in joint third place were jaffles@no3 and what the fork ; in second place was liberteas ; and the winner was epicurean lounge . will the leader of the house congratulate that café , and café owners up and down this country , because they are so important in our society ? i think the hon . gentleman said that one of the winners was what the fork . what a forking good idea his competition was . i congratulate the winners , and all his constituents on taking part . i look forward to a bacon butty , a cup of tea , and maybe a piece of cake in hinckley and bosworth at some point in the future . i commend the work of five volunteers in my community who run lichfield community media cic . by operating a news website , they have prevented our area from becoming a news desert . unfortunately , their posts are being blocked because algorithms on social media sites highlight them as spam . does the leader of the house agree that the issue of how independent publishers can access their audiences through social media would be a good topic for a debate ? my hon . friend raises a really important matter , not just for independent publishers but for national news publishers , who are subject to the whims of tech giants when it comes to algorithms , and finding important journalistic work and news . i think the topic would make for a very well attended debate . this week , we witnessed the unedifying spectacle of scottish labour mps labouring under the misapprehension that if they put forward an idea that was to the benefit of scotland , ministers in the united kingdom would take it forward . i am talking about the scottish immigration visa system . can we have a debate in government time that lays bare the fact that when scotland ’s ambitions are at odds , or even at variance , with those of england , westminster will put scotland aside — not just sometimes or most of the time , but every time ? i am sorry to say this , but the last time i looked , labour mps in scotland won many seats in the recent election , and scottish nationalist mps lost many . labour members who represent scottish seats in this house have done a fantastic job in standing up for scotland , resetting the relationship , and ensuring that the people of scotland benefit from this new labour government . this week ’s public inquiry on the proposed toll increase for the tamar crossings highlighted clear local opposition . this gateway to south east cornwall is a vital link between cornwall and devon , and the crossings are among the only ones not managed by national highways . the tolls place a burden on my constituents , who have no alternative to paying in order to access healthcare services over the river . will the leader of the house make government time available for a debate on fair and affordable transport in areas such as mine ? i thank my hon . friend for raising this issue , which i know will be important to her constituents in south east cornwall . i understand that there will be a final decision by the transport secretary once the inspector produces their report . i will of course ensure that the transport secretary comes to this house to tell my hon . friend about that decision . just two months ago , paul reeves , a well respected farmer and agricultural business owner in my constituency , took his own life . sadly , his story is all too common , with the many challenges that the industry often faces contributing to poor mental health . farming families like paul ’s are the bedrock of our country . without them , we simply could not function , and when they are struggling we must support them . in paul ’s memory , may we have a debate on improving mental health in our farming and agricultural communities ? i am really sorry to hear about paul reeves , and i send the condolences of the whole house to his family and friends . the hon . lady raises the subject of the mental health of our farming community , and many members across the house will relate to what she said . that community does an amazing job to keep this country fed and well cared for , and to support nature , among many other things . that issue would make a good topic for a debate , which would be a popular one . two of my constituents , hayley and craig vaughan , sadly lost their son archie to brain cancer three years ago . on one of his final holidays , they took him to one of his favourite places : a caravan by the seaside . archie ’s parents have channelled their grief by setting up a charity called archie ’s caravan , which offers free holidays to children in archie ’s position and their families . will the leader of the house join me in paying tribute to archie , to his incredible parents , and to the amazing work that their charity does , and will she make space in government time for a debate on the care received by children with cancer after their diagnosis ? i join my hon . friend in paying tribute to archie , his parents and the fantastic work of that charity . the government are committed to supporting children and young people with cancer . we established a children and young people taskforce earlier this year . i am sure that the secretary of state will come to the house to update us on that . two days ago , the conservative administration at hertfordshire county council filibustered during a debate , preventing a liberal democrat motion on improving special educational needs and disabilities services in hertfordshire from being debated at all . may we have a debate in government time about the importance of scrutiny and constructive opposition at all levels of government , especially on the issue of send ? in hertfordshire , send services are failing children . first and foremost , my job as leader of the house of commons is to ensure that issues are scrutinised and debated in this house , and that we do not filibuster and disrespect people ’s views , or topics that they want to raise . i hope that parties across local government respect that , too . the important matter of send , which the hon . lady mentioned , is raised here a lot , so i am sure that if she applied for a debate , it would be well attended . from stotfold to shefford in my constituency , homeowners on new estates have been trapped by the growth of the leasehold scandal . they are left having to deal with unaccountable and underperforming management companies , and often pay twice for services that people normally receive through paying council tax . after my vociferous lobbying of the then shadow housing minister , my hon . friend as the mp for manchester central , i know only too well about the absolutely appalling circumstances that many leaseholders find themselves in , with rising costs from managing agents and insurance , and other issues . that is why i was absolutely delighted to ensure that leasehold reform was in the king ’s speech . we will get a draft bill soon , and the government are quickly implementing the leasehold and freehold reform act 2024 . an nhs foundation trust is advertising for psychologists to work with children with gender dysphoria . it says that applicants must practise in a gender - affirming manner . that runs completely contrary to what the cass review said . may we have a statement from the health secretary on the implementation of the cass review in the nhs ? i will ask the secretary of state to come to the house with an update on the cass review , but i think it important when discussing these matters that we do not raise issues that may not be quite as they seem . we must handle these issues carefully , as some young people and adults have real challenges with gender dysphoria that can cause them a great deal of mental upset . i will look into the matter that the hon . gentleman raises and ask the secretary of state to come to the house . i welcome the government ’s move this week to ensure that veterans , including those in my constituency , who were turned away when trying to use their veteran ’s id to vote in the recent general election will be able to use that form of id next year . it is not just veterans we need to support , but current servicemen and women and their families . may we have some government time to talk about how we can support those brave men and women ? i , too , was delighted that this government took quick action to deliver their manifesto commitment to ensuring that veterans ’ cards could be used as voter id , and i am pleased to hear of my hon . friend ’s reaction to that . as he will be aware , this government are committed to an armed forces commissioner bill . i can tell him today that that bill is fairly imminent , and i am sure that we can debate some of these issues as we approach remembrance sunday , too . tsering tso , a tibetan human rights defender and tour guide , has repeatedly faced arbitrary detention and harassment by chinese authorities for advocating for the rights of tibetans to freedom of movement and equal treatment under chinese law . her most recent detention occurred in june 2024 , following her public criticism of local authorities ’ discriminatory practices against tibetan monks . tsering has been subjected to administrative detention on multiple occasions , having raised concerns about racial discrimination and the unlawful detention of tibetans — two monks were arrested while on a pilgrimage . what representations can his majesty ’s government make to the chinese authorities on the detention and repeated harassment of tsering tso ? this government stand firm on human rights , including china ’s repression of the people of tibet . the hon . gentleman will be aware that the foreign secretary is to make a diplomatic visit to china ; i know that he will raise these matters in his conversations . i will ensure that he comes to this house to give an update on how that visit goes . to show us how it is done in one or two sentences , i call steve race . last night , the university of exeter , the met office and peers for the planet launched the latest edition of “ the parliamentarians ’ guide to climate change ” , which is a vital resource for us all . will the leader of the house welcome that report , as i do , and will she commend it to members of this house and the other house ? i absolutely welcome that report , and of course i commend it to members of both houses . the new rules on wine duty being implemented in february 2025 will be overly complicated and incredibly burdensome , especially for smaller , independent wine importers such as canned wine in bath . the chief executive officer of that local business told me that the incremental duty rates will put incredible strain on their business . can we have a debate in government time on this important issue ? i know that the issue of wine duty is really important in the hon . lady ’s constituency , and i am sure that we will have ample time to debate wine and other alcohol duties in the many days of debate that we will have on the budget , which is coming up soon . recently in my constituency , i held a meeting with residents of water orton to hear how ongoing high speed 2 works are affecting them . my residents are suffering from mental and physical health issues because of the air and noise pollution caused by those works . may we have a debate in government time on those effects , and how we can improve them ? the ongoing mishandling and mismanagement of the hs2 project has been a bit of an embarrassment for this country , i am afraid . i am sure the secretary of state for transport will update the house on these matters soon , and of course , the hs2 hybrid bill is proceeding through parliament as we speak . rossington main ladies football club created a slice of history last weekend by qualifying for the first round proper of the adobe women ’s fa cup . will the minister join me in congratulating captain steph prescott and the team , and wish them good luck against accrington stanley — who are they?—in the first round in november ? no time for jokes ! i congratulate rossington main ladies football club and their captain steph , and wish them great luck against accrington stanley , who we all remember fondly from adverts . my inbox is full to the brim with complaints about yorkshire water ’s lack of investment , on issues from failed pumping stations to polluted rivers . can the leader of the house advise members on when we can highlight the chronic under - investment in our nation ’s water supply ? it is a priority for this government to take action against the water bosses , get the investment that we need and ensure that the costs are not all passed on to customers . my hon . friend makes an important case . dare nt valley hospital in my constituency needs significant expansion . quarter 1 figures indicate that more than 32,000 people are waiting for treatment , and the hospital can not cope with the new homes being built in the area . will my right hon . friend schedule a debate about the need to expand hospital provision in dartford and across the country ? waiting lists are at a record high , which is why the government dealt immediately with the industrial action to get our doctors back on the frontline . we are committed to more gp appointments in my hon . friend ’s constituency and elsewhere . the government ’s target is 40,000 more appointments a week , which we will deliver . many of my constituents are frustrated by rip - off car parking companies such as hozah , which issue threatening letters and fines to people who have , in many cases , followed or barely breached the rules . may we have a debate in government time on how we clamp down on those parking pirates to ensure that our town centres can thrive and our retailers can grow ? the government will set out in due course our plans for the regulation of the private parking industry , which causes many problems , as my hon . friend describes . i will ensure that the relevant minister comes to the house to update hon . members at that time . i call jim dickson—[interruption . ] no , i call andy macnae . i am going so fast that i am losing my place . i will try to be equally fast , mr speaker . my constituents face dangerous speeding on the roads past their homes and schools every single day . when they raise deep concerns with the police or the council , they are too often told that not enough people have been killed or seriously injured . they rightly feel that that makes no sense . they know the risks — they see the close calls every day — so why should they wait for a neighbour to be killed before action is taken ? will the leader of the house agree to a debate in government time on the subject of prevention in road safety , using international best practice and new technologies ? my hon . friend is a great champion for rossendale and darwen , and for road safety issues in his constituency . we will soon deliver an updated strategic framework for road safety — the first in over a decade — and i will ensure that a transport minister comes to the house to update hon . members . the leader of the house referred earlier to the modernisation committee . can she update us on its work on the key issue of call lists , which worked well in this place during covid and work well in the other place every day , and on her wider efforts to make this place a more family - friendly parliament ? the issue of call lists and the desire for a more family - friendly parliament have been raised by many hon . members , especially those who are newly elected , and i hope that a wealth of people will input to the call for views that the modernisation committee opened today . i call alex ballinger — your patience has been noted . i recently met headteachers across my constituency to talk about the challenges they are facing after 14 years of conservative mismanagement of the education sector . they raised several issues , but in the interests of time i will mention only curriculum reform , which they were particularly interested in . i ask the leader of the house to schedule a debate in government time on curriculum reform , so that we can consider the views of teachers in my constituency . last but certainly not least , my hon . friend raises what i know is a big issue in halesowen ’s schools . the government are committed to curriculum reform . one of the first acts of the secretary of state for education was to establish an independent review of curriculum and assessment , led by professor becky francis cbe . i know that the secretary of state will be regularly updating the house on that . it is fantastic to get everybody in . i will focus more on names . with permission , madam deputy speaker , i will make a statement on capacity in the criminal justice system . when this government came to power , we inherited prisons on the brink of disaster , moments from total collapse . had that happened , the consequences would have been apocalyptic : courts would have been forced to cancel all trials , the police would have been barred from making arrests , and we would have faced the total breakdown of law and order . the last government knew what had to be done . my predecessor , the former lord chancellor , begged his prime minister to act , but rather than have the bravery to do so , the now leader of the opposition chose to call an election instead . as a result , it fell to this government to take the necessary but difficult action . while they say that to govern is to choose , my predecessors left me with no choice at all . on today , i can set out a measure that will begin to address a specific and acute cause of our prisons capacity crisis : the remand population . as this house will know , prisoners on remand are in our jails but have not yet been tried or sentenced . because of the historical backlog in our crown courts — another element of the woeful inheritance my predecessors handed to me — the remand population in prisons has soared . today , it stands at a record 17,000 , which is nearly one in every five prisoners . as some members will know , remand prisoners are an especially acute problem as they are placed in so - called reception or category b prisons . until they are tried and sentenced , they can not be moved elsewhere in the estate . it is in our reception prisons that we face the most acute capacity pressure in the country . unless we address our remand population , we could still see a collapse of the system , not because of a lack of cells , but because we do not have those cells in the places we need them . it is therefore crucial that we bear down on the remand population . magistrates courts have sentencing powers for only up to six months ’ imprisonment for a single triable either - way offence , and only the crown court can hand down sentences beyond that . between may 2022 and march 2023 , the previous government chose to extend magistrates court sentencing powers to 12 months . this enabled magistrates courts to retain more sentencing hearings and meant that they were heard more quickly . it also freed up capacity in the crown court to hear more complex cases . however , magistrates ’ sentencing powers were then reduced back to six months when , having failed to address the capacity crisis in our prisons , the pressure on prison places became too great . this government have now acted to relieve that pressure , so i can announce that we will extend magistrates ’ sentencing powers back to 12 months ’ imprisonment . on this measure will also allow us to begin to address the remand problem in our prisons , but it will do more than that . this government inherited a record crown court backlog . waits for trials have grown so long that some cases are not heard for years . the impact on victims of crime is profound . for some , justice delayed is , as the old saying goes , justice denied , as victims choose to withdraw from the justice process altogether rather than face the pain of a protracted legal battle . by extending magistrates ’ powers , we will be able to make progress on addressing the crown court backlog , and we will free the crown court to take on more of the cases that only it can hear . this measure is expected to free up an equivalent of 2,000 sitting days within the crown court each year , which will add capacity on top of the additional 500 sitting days that this government funded on taking office . this measure will , in total , see a slight increase in the overall prison population , but by bearing down on the remand population in our reception prisons , we will create capacity where we need it most . this measure allows us to manage our prison population smartly , and it means we can both address our prisons crisis and tackle the courts backlog . when this government came to power , we inherited a justice system in crisis . we took immediate action to avert a total breakdown of law and order . we are now beginning the work of ensuring that this country never faces this crisis again . there will be more that we must do . in the coming weeks , i will return to the house and set out our long - term plan for the justice system , but these new powers for magistrates mark an important step . they help us alleviate the capacity pressures caused by the historical remand population that we inherited , and begin to address the record crown court backlog that my predecessors handed to me . in so doing , for victims across the country they will make justice swifter , and ensure that more criminals receive the punishment that they deserve . i commend this statement to the house . i call the shadow minister . i am grateful to the lord chancellor and her civil servants for their typical courtesy in giving me early sight of her statement . i am also grateful to magistrates , to whom i pay tribute . in many ways , they are the backbone of our justice system , and like juries they root our justice system in our local communities . their service is hugely appreciated , as is the work of the magistrates ’ association , and i recognise their skill and dedication . the lord chancellor highlighted the backlog as context . as she will know , in 2010 the backlog that we inherited in the crown courts was 48,000 . it was reduced to 40,000 by 2019 , but we recognise that it is a lot higher now . the change ? a pandemic . she rightly referred to significant increases in the remand population . during the pandemic , supported by the then opposition , we opted not to mass - release prisoners , as other countries did , and not to cancel jury trials . that of course led to increases in the remand population , compounded by the effect of the bar strike . the vast bulk of the backlog is in the crown courts , as the lord chancellor will know , and it is right to recognise the interrelationship between magistrates courts and crown courts . i believe that the concordat on sitting days had not been formally signed by the former lord chancellor at the time of the election , and i therefore saw with concern that , in stark contrast to previous lord chancellors who increased sitting days , it appears we will see a reduction of 2,700 sitting days compared with last year . i would be grateful for the lord chancellor ’s reflections on that . in 2019 there were 85,000 sitting days , and 107,700 last year . this year the cap appears to be at 105,000 . that appears to be the government ’s choice , but i would welcome clarity from the lord chancellor on that . the changes that the lord chancellor has set out were characterised by the chair of the criminal bar association , mary prior kc , in the guardian : “ this is a knee - jerk reaction , done without consulting — once again — the criminal barristers or solicitors who deal every day with these cases ” . there are therefore a number of questions about that and the broader criminal justice system , given the scope of the right hon . lady ’s statement , which i hope she will be able to answer . has she conducted a complete impact assessment for the changes , and will she publish that and all the modelling on it prior to the statutory instrument being laid ? how many people are currently on remand , and will she share with the house the latest , most up - to - date figure ? reports suggest that this measure will in the short term potentially increase pressure on prison places , so will she say by what amount her modelling suggests that will be ? what prior consultation did she or her department undertake with the criminal bar association , the bar council and the law society before making this decision ? what assessment has she made of the impact of the decision announced today on the backlog and on the number of short custodial sentence passed by the courts ? given that the right hon . lady explicitly referred to her prisoner early release scheme , i hope she will be able to answer all those questions , but there is also one important question that i hope she will answer today by way of reassurance : are any of the 37 prisoners released in error last month still roaming free , or have they all been safely returned to prison ? i would be grateful for clarification on that , because it is important . we will find out in under two weeks whether , in pre - budget spending discussions with the chancellor , the right hon . lady has successfully fought for investment and in the interests of justice and victims of crime , or whether she has sold out the victims and the systems , and conceded cuts to the treasury . if she has succeeded in securing additional investment , she will have my gratitude and support . if she has not , we will rightly hold her to account . it is almost as if the shadow lord chancellor was not , in fact , a minister in the ministry of justice just a few short months ago . let me remind him of a few salient facts . first , on crown court sitting days , i will not accept any suggestion or allegation from him that this government have cut sitting days or trials in the crown court . that is entirely untrue . as he knows , or ought to know , perfectly well — i am sure he can check with the former lord chancellor — on every year , the government and the judiciary agree a number of sitting days , and an overall budget to fund those sitting days , in what is known as the concordat process . in june , the judiciary reached an agreement with the former lord chancellor to sit 106,000 days in the crown court , with a total budget of £ 275 million . it has become clear that there has been over - listing against that budget , with more trials scheduled than the funding allowed for . as a result , some cases have had to be delisted , although far fewer than some recent reporting has suggested — it was claimed that around 5,000 sitting days were being cancelled , and i know that the shadow lord chancellor had some other numbers in his remarks . in fact , as i understand it , the number is more like 1,600 sitting days . although misleading reports have abounded , one thing is clear : the concordat process has not worked as it should . i can assure the house that the first concordat process on my watch will be very different , and such confusions will not occur again . the shadow lord chancellor asked a number of questions relating to the impact assessment for the changes announced today . i will publish all the usual impact assessments when the statutory instrument is published . as i said in my opening remarks , we expect an initial impact on prison places , but over time we expect that to come down . we have a little more space in prisons because of the action we have taken to stabilise the pressure on prison places . it is a sensible measure to then take the opportunity to bear down on the crown court backlog by providing the extra 2,000 sitting days that this change will allow , while also bearing down further on our remand population . as the shadow lord chancellor will know , the exact numbers are difficult to model because listing is a matter for the judiciary . some of those on remand will ultimately be found not guilty and some will be found guilty and sentenced , and the whole range of sentencing measures is available to the independent judiciary . but we expect to make some progress on the remand population and , crucially , to be able to move people from the reception estate into the rest of the prison estate , thereby helping us to make sure we have the prison places where we need them . i can also confirm that all of the 37 people released in error because of being incorrectly sentenced are now back in custody . i call the chair of the justice committee . as someone who spent a decade shadowing and scrutinising the previous government ’s justice policies , i sympathise with the lord chancellor over the chaos she has inherited , but the proposed changes to magistrates ’ sentencing powers may have mixed results . they should ease the backlog in the crown court , but they may put additional pressure on our overcrowded prisons . my concern is that we do not have robust data on the crown court backlog or on the effects of varying sentencing . the government are about to embark on a quick but thorough review of sentencing . will they use that opportunity to get the policy and the figures lined up ? i think this is my first chance in the house to welcome my hon . friend to his new position as chair of the justice committee . let me deal with crown court data first . in fairness to the previous government , they discovered this error prior to the conclusion of their term in office . when i came in , i was made aware of the issue with crown court data . i ordered further investigation and examination of the issues . it is clear that a number of problems with the data — a number of errors and other issues — need to be resolved . we will make sure that it is published when we can be sure that it is accurate and that all those errors have been finally resolved . clearly , the situation is unacceptable . i am in discussion with the lady chief justice about the need for a full external audit of crown court data , because i think we can all agree that that data must be accurate . we clearly must do more to restore confidence in the reporting process , and i will update the house further in due course . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson . i thank the secretary of state for advance sight of her statement . so many of my constituents are appalled by the state in which the conservatives have left our justice system : huge court backlogs , a woefully big remand population , overcrowded prisons and so many victims and survivors without justice . i therefore welcome her determination to arrest this problem and this decline , and especially the reports of her correspondence with the prime minister over a fully funded ministry of justice . however , i want to address some of the liberal democrats ’ key concerns about some of the proposals that she has set out . first , the secretary of state recognised that there may be additional issues with prison capacity in the short term . with the system bursting at the seams and with us , a matter of weeks ago , just 100 men away from the prisons being completely full , how will she prevent our prisons from collapsing as a result of these measures ? secondly , on prison effectiveness , putting too many eggs in the prisons basket will ultimately fail to keep our communities safe . we know that 75 % of ex - offenders go on to reoffend within nine years of being released . from the work i did before i arrived in this place on getting kids out of crime and out of gangs , i know that rehabilitation , done holistically , is a critical way of reducing reoffending and victimhood . how will the secretary of state double down on rehabilitation and through - the - gate mentoring programmes to reduce offending ? thirdly , these measures will put more pressure on magistrates courts , at a time when many , such as my own in eastbourne , have closed . that risks forcing victims of crimes currently heard in those courts to wait even longer for justice . how will the secretary of state address that risk ? finally , one of the worst justice secretaries in recent memory , dominic raab , tried a similar policy in 2022 , with magistrates increasing the number of people being sent to prison on short sentences . the scheme was dropped after a year , and short - sentence reoffending rates are at 57 % , which is a deplorable number . how will the secretary of state avoid these measures backfiring in a similar way ? just for reference , your questions should be two minutes , no longer . i thank the hon . member for his questions . i am very aware of the number of places in our prison estate , and we had a particularly difficult moment before the last bank holiday , in august , when we came down to fewer than 100 . however , as a result of the measures we have taken on sds40 , there is now some space and some capacity in our prison system . it is important that we use this opportunity also to bear down on the remand population and to deal with the crown court backlog . this is a delicate balancing exercise , and it is one that i will personally be keeping a close eye on and keeping under review . however , i think that the measure we have announced is ultimately the right one , because it helps us with our prison capacity challenges . as a result , we will have the prison places where we need them — in the reception prisons — and we can start moving people out to other parts of the estate , which is not possible until cases are heard . i am confident that we have the capacity in the magistrates courts to deal with the additional workload . again , i will be keeping that under review . the hon . member is right : 80 % of offenders are actually reoffenders . this country has a real problem with failing to rehabilitate offenders , and our record on reducing reoffending is not as strong as it should be . prison has a place , and it is really important that people who break our laws are properly punished . that is necessary for the public to maintain confidence in our system and for law - abiding citizens to feel that there are consequences when our laws are broken . there is no doubt in my mind that punishment and prison are important , but they go hand in hand with rehabilitation . i do not think there is a choice to be made between punishment and rehabilitation — they are two sides of the same coin , and we have to have both . this government are determined to have a better track record on both punishment and rehabilitation compared with anything that has gone on in the previous 14 years . let me gently say that it is not the case that magistrates courts send more people to prison . following the previous change the courts were able to run through cases faster , and because the previous government had not created capacity in the prison estate , the pressure on prison places became acute and the measure had to be dropped back to six months — the shadow lord chancellor might wish to offer further comments on that . that is what happened and what i expect to happen again . it is fascinating and powerful to hear the plans to deal with the backlog in the courts . i know that all our constituents will be grateful for the lord chancellor ’s work . i have a constituent who was the victim of an aggravated burglary that involved multiple men coming to her house with machetes in 2021 . finally , last week at snaresbrook crown court , a date for the trial of the gentlemen accused of this crime was set for october 2026 . the lord chancellor will recognise and share the concern of my constituent . as she says , justice delayed is justice denied . what comfort can she give my constituent that such matters will be expedited as a result of her work ? i am very sorry to hear about the experience of my hon . friend ’s constituent . i have many such instances of unacceptable delays for hearing cases in my own constituency caseload . i hope that the measures that i have announced today will begin to ease some of that pressure , because making this change will free up around 2,000 sitting days in the crown court . this government have funded an additional 500 beyond the concordat process agreement that was reached by the previous government in june . i am determined to make more progress in dealing with the crown court backlog so that constituents such as my hon . friend ’s do not have to wait so many years for their cases to be heard and , ultimately , for justice to be done . may i reach out across the party divide to say that i warmly welcome what the justice secretary said about punishment and rehabilitation ? by coincidence , i have just written to her — she will not have seen the letter yet — about the work of my constituent , the publisher andrew duncan , in co - ordination with a panel of experts that includes a psychology professor , a former governor of pentonville , a probation service specialist in reducing reoffending and a central london magistrate , on a new concept of community detention . my request is that either she or the minister she thinks most appropriate will agree to have a meeting with my constituent , a few members of his team and me . as a right - of - centre politician , i am sometimes sceptical of alternatives to prison . this one sounds really interesting , and i think it would not be a waste of her time . i thank the right hon . member for the spirit in which he made his remarks . i hope that where consensus is possible on a cross - party basis across this house , we are able to work together , because this is a national problem that will require us all to come together to solve it . i will track down his letter and ensure that he gets a full response and a meeting . in shropshire , the justice system is broken . under the watch of the last conservative government , the remand court in shropshire magistrates court was closed and transferred to kidderminster . i am delighted to say that , under this government ’s watch , that remand court is about to reopen . some 300 court sessions are running empty each and every year at shropshire magistrates court . my local paper , the shropshire star , highlighted a criminal trial — it involved a retrial — that will take seven years from the original date of the offence to be disposed of , which is an absolute disgrace . will the lord chancellor look at ways in which we can further empower district judges in the magistrates court , and at the use of technology in the justice system ? finally , it is important that the transparency around data is fixed . unfortunately , the last conservative government did not release the data on time . we need to understand what is really going on now , and what has happened in the past . my hon . friend is absolutely right . cases are taking too long to reach conclusion in our courts . we are making some changes , and i am considering what further ones we will need to make . there is an important piece around efficiency and productivity in the court system , and there have also been reports by lord justice auld , lord leveson and others on other ways to speed up trials being heard . all those options are on the table , and i will update the house in due course about this government ’s approach . i simply reiterate my remarks on the data : when it is finally published , it is important that we can be certain that it is accurate and properly captures what is going on in our crown courts and that we can all have confidence in it . in fairness , the last government did pick up on this problem . i am determined that it will be resolved and that the data will ultimately be published . i thank the secretary of state for her very welcome statement . there is a clear commitment to the change that is necessary . she will note that i nearly always focus on victims , so will she outline what weight is given to victim impact statements , and whether there is a need to determine in law how much weight is given to the impact on devastated families ? i always think of the devastated families — they are the ones who are really important . let me reassure the hon . member that we place great importance in the victim ’s experience . this government will strengthen that further and ensure that victims are not further traumatised by their experience of seeking justice . victim impact statements have an important role to play . the victims minister , my hon . friend i thank the lord chancellor and her department for their important work in tackling the backlog . given that the previous government agreed the funding allocation , who does she feel is responsible for the number of crown court sitting days being cut ? has she explored the further use of artificial intelligence in small judgments to speed up the backlog ? i reiterate my previous remarks on what has happened to crown court sitting days , but i do not think it is helpful for me to speculate on who is ultimately responsible . it is clear that the concordat process has not worked as it should . as i said , the first process that i conduct as lord chancellor will not have those issues . an agreement was reached and it has to be stuck to . i am sure that all those in the system are worried about the impact on victims — they are the ones who will be waiting longer . as i said , although reports have suggested that up to 5,000 sitting days have been cancelled , the number is more like 1,600 , and the changes we have announced today will free up capacity in the crown courts . i am very interested in the role that ai and other technology and digital solutions can play in increasing efficiency and productivity in the crown court system and the court system more broadly . that is subject to discussions in relation to the budget and the spending review . i hope to update the house in due course . i am very concerned to hear of the missed publication of crown court backlog data . how can we hope to drive down the backlog if we do not know how big it is ? one of the reasons why i am determined to get to the bottom of what has gone wrong , and to ensure that all errors and accuracy issues are dealt with , is so that we have comprehensive data that we can rely upon . we know that the crown court backlog is at historic levels . sadly , i do not think that any assurance work on the data will suddenly bring that down — i suspect it is more likely to go up — but it is important to establish the true scale of that backlog , because this house needs to know exactly what it looks like so that it can hold the government to account on their efforts to bring it down . we can not do that unless we know its exact size . sadly , i suspect it will remain at the historic levels that we have inherited — i do not think it will come down by much . i thank the lord chancellor very much for her statement . it is very clear , from everything we have seen over the past 14 years and since my hon . friend is absolutely right . there must always be space in our prisons to lock up the most dangerous offenders . we must always place public protection above all other considerations when it comes to dangerous violent offenders . when we have a capacity crisis as acute as the one i inherited , we unfortunately have to also consider alternatives , simply because running out of space is no option at all . i reiterate the remarks i made earlier : punishment and rehabilitation have to go together . it is not a choice between one or the other . they are two sides of the same coin and the government are determined to make progress on both . my constituents will welcome the clarity that the lord chancellor has provided today . with reference to her point about the long - term plan for the justice system , a plan that we have to get right , may i ask her to keep in mind the need for a proper , robust and accessible legal aid system ? my hon . friend is absolutely right . legal aid underpins our system of justice and access to justice . stabilising the situation in relation to legal aid is a key priority for the government . i have a number of prisons in my constituency , so i was particularly concerned to read about serco ’s failures on tagging . what is the secretary of state doing to hold it to account ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . serco ’s performance is unacceptable . we are having daily meetings with it to ensure it recovers the position . i have made it clear that improved performance is an absolutely priority . we are already imposing financial penalties , given its performance to date , and we will not hesitate to trigger relevant contractual penalties if it does not improve . i thank my right hon . friend for her statement , and commend her and her ministerial team for the work they are doing to fix the last 14 years of tory mess in this department . in her statement , she talked about the withdrawal of victims from the process . on that point , 60 % of rape victims are dropping out of their cases , partly because they are waiting years for justice . will the secretary of state explain how independent legal advocates will support victims to see their cases through to trial ? the introduction of independent legal advocates for rape victims will , we believe , ensure that the rights that victims already have will be enforced , and in such a way as to give them the confidence to continue with their cases . this is a key priority policy for our party and for the government , and i will be very pleased to be able to roll it out over the coming months and years . it is a significant change to our legal system . it will be the first time that independent legal advice is given to a type of victim . we think that is incredibly important , because rape victims lose confidence in the process and are often re - traumatised by the process of seeking justice . the independent legal advocates will try to ensure that the scales of justice are rebalanced and that victims have a fair shot at having their already existing legal rights enforced . prisons have two vital functions : punishment and rehabilitation . reoffending has gone up , because after 14 years under the conservatives prisons have become colleges of crime . we need to get the basics right and we need to get the fundamentals right on prison education reform . will my right hon . friend look at how we can improve literacy and numeracy skills in our prison estate ? we will of course look at improved literacy and other skills within our prison estate . the problem with running a prison estate as hot as the previous government did , and so full to the brim , is that when we are so badly overcrowded and prisoners are locked up for 23 hours every day , there is very little other work we can do to help prisoners rehabilitate . dealing with the capacity crisis will enable us to have a better performance and better track record on rehabilitation , which is crucial if we are ultimately to reduce the number of victims in future and cut crime . does the secretary of state agree that failing to address the prisons capacity crisis and allowing the crown court backlog to grow to unprecedented levels has meant that the entirety of our criminal justice system has been broken ? i make particular reference to rape and serious sexual offences cases . it is clear that the position i have inherited from my predecessors was shocking and completely unacceptable . we were , simply , one bad day away from total disaster in our criminal justice system . that is why , since we formed the government , we have been making the difficult choices necessary to stabilise our criminal justice system and stabilise the situation in our prisons , so we can restore the system to one that the public can rightly have confidence in . with permission , i will make a statement on the government ’s plans to deliver additional places in school - based nurseries , and a clarification on government action on so - called top - up fees for funded childcare hours . i will also update the house on the government ’s response to the consultation on safeguarding requirements in the early years foundation stage framework . the secretary of state has promised a new era of child - centred government , working alongside the sector to deliver meaningful long - term reform of the early years system . the government believe that all children deserve access to a brilliant early education , regardless of who they are , where they come from or their parents ’ income . today marks a significant step for thousands of families , as we begin the first stage of the government ’s plan to deliver 3,000 new or expanded school - based nurseries . from today , primary schools can apply for a grant of up to £ 150,000 from a £ 15 million capital funding pot to make the changes needed for their site to accommodate a nursery . the new or expanded nurseries are set to open across england from the start of the next school year . we have chosen to expand school - based nurseries because schools are at the heart of our communities . school - based nurseries cater for a higher proportion of children with special educational needs and disabilities , and offer a higher share of nursery places in the most deprived areas . to support our most vulnerable children and build on the existing market , the funding will be available for projects that are either school - run or delivered on the school ’s site by private and voluntary providers or childminders . schools will be asked to work with local authorities to demonstrate local parental demand for places . if there are primary schools that are interested in this programme but are not currently ready or eligible to host new nursery places , we encourage them to register an interest for the future . we expect funding to be allocated to successful schools in spring 2025 to support delivery of the first nursery places from september 2025 . as we expand the childcare system , it is crucial that early education and childcare remains fair and accessible to all parents . that is why we are taking action to address situations where parents are facing high and additional charges on top of the funded entitlement hours . those charges , which may include mandatory fees for nappies , lunch , or additional hours , should not be a condition for accessing a funded place . the vast majority of providers are working hard to make sure that parents can access their entitlements , but any sort of mandatory additional charging or preferential treatment towards parents who purchase optional extras is not acceptable . over the next few months , my department will engage with local authorities , providers and parents to develop and clarify guidance on this issue , including on so - called “ top - up fees ” . we will support local authorities to protect parents from overcharging . i turn to new childcare entitlements . in september , working parents of children aged nine months and above were able to access 15 hours per week of government - funded early education for the first time . i can confirm that over 320,000 additional children are now accessing the new entitlement . delivering the scheme has not been without difficulty and owes much to the collaboration between local authorities , providers and the work of my right hon . friend , the secretary of state , who has made ensuring the roll - out a priority . at the same time , we are helping the sector to deliver the necessary places for september 2025 . this final , more challenging phase of the roll - out will increase the funded childcare entitlement of working parents to 30 hours per week . trust matters in politics , which is why i want to reiterate this government ’s commitment to honouring the promise made by the last government to deliver these entitlements , but the house should be in no doubt that this will be an extremely difficult task . there remains a significant shortage of staff and places . the government ’s spending watchdog has said that , in order to deliver the roll - out , in some parts of the country we will need to double or even triple capacity in order to provide the additional hours . there are substantial gaps to fill , left behind knowingly by the conservative party . we must be honest with families about the fact that in some parts of england , while parents may receive the hours they were promised , they may not get their first choice of nursery or childminder . i assure the house that we will continue to work tirelessly to bridge the gaps in time for next september , and our plans to expand primary school - based nurseries will help us to deliver these entitlements . our priority is to provide high - quality education and care for children while ensuring their safety , in order to give every child the best start in life . today the department published its official response to the consultation on proposals to strengthen safeguarding requirements in the statutory early years foundation stage framework . these reforms are set to be implemented from september 2025 . the changes to be made to the framework are based on lessons learned from tragic past events , responses to our consultation , and feedback from safeguarding experts and the sector . the consultation received 1,470 responses , with strong support for all the proposals . the department will therefore implement all the proposals , including those on safer recruitment , child absences , safer eating , safeguarding training , and paediatric first aid training . there will also be new proposals on providing employment references and supporting whistleblowing . these changes will formalise existing best practices , and will ensure that all early years educators have the knowledge and support that they need to deliver safe , high - quality early education and childcare . as many parents know , childminders are a key part of the early education and childcare market , providing choice and flexibility . we are already delivering childminder start - up grants to help new childminders with the costs of registering , and on parents ’ need for childcare does not stop when their children reach primary school age . since july , we have allocated more than £ 130 million to local authorities to begin delivering these new places to parents of primary school age children as part of the national wraparound childcare programme . initial delivery plans indicate that this programme will deliver up to 200,000 new childcare places , at either end of the school day , available in over 50 % of all primary schools . however , we want to go further to support hard - working families and tackle disadvantage , which is why we committed ourselves in our manifesto to introducing free breakfast clubs in every primary school . breakfast clubs can have a tremendously positive impact in helping children to arrive at school on time and ready to learn , while also helping working parents to have more choices in the workplace . from april 2025 , free breakfast clubs will be available in up to 750 early adopter schools . that will be part of the test - and - learn phase , but new breakfast clubs , once rolled out nationally , will be available to every state - funded school with primary school age children , and will give parents more affordable childcare choices while also helping families with the cost of living . children will be able to start the school day ready to learn , which will give them the best start in life and in their education . this government are determined to break down barriers to opportunity . that must start before school , with high - quality early education that is both available and affordable . we inherited a pledge without a plan , so this labour government must work to deliver the change that families need . we will deliver places in new nurseries , tackle unfair “ top - up fees ” , and ensure that every child can have the best start in life . i commend this statement to the house . order . i should explain to newer colleagues that interventions are not made during statements by ministers or responses from shadow ministers . i now call the shadow minister to respond to the minister ’s statement . i thank the minister for giving me advance sight of his statement . labour members may take this opportunity to create a fictitious narrative about the alleged failures of the former government on early years and childcare , but it will not wash with us and it will not wash with the british public . that is simply because our record on childcare is strong , so let me take this opportunity to remind the government and the house exactly what it is . in 2010 , we extended the three and four - year - old entitlement , commonly taken as 15 hours a week for 38 weeks of the year . in 2013 , we introduced 15 hours of free early education a week for disadvantaged two - year - olds . in 2017 , we doubled the three and four - year - old entitlement to 30 hours per week for working parents , as well as introducing tax - free childcare , which meant that for every £ 8 people paid in , the government would automatically add £ 2 to support childcare costs — on top of the free - hours entitlement . in march 2023 , we announced the biggest expansion of childcare by a uk government in history . it was intended to give working parents access to 30 hours of free childcare a week , from when their children were nine months old until they started school , and to save families an average of £ 6,900 a year . our reason for doing that was simple : childcare is one of the biggest costs facing working families today , as well as one of the biggest barriers to parents returning to work if and when they wish to do so . i want to take this opportunity to thank early years providers , local authorities , membership bodies , and other key partners who have made delivering this possible . i welcome the fact that the government have finally agreed that rolling out our childcare expansion will empower parents to make the choice that is best for them , and are committed to doing so . i am , however , disappointed that they did not do more to spread awareness among parents of the childcare entitlements that became available in september . will the minister tell us whether there was any unspent budget for this , and will he now commit himself to increasing the publicising of childcare roll - outs so that parents are rightly aware of their entitlements ? of course the opposition welcome the expansion of childcare and support the idea of utilising unused space in schools , which provides a single point of contact for parents with multiple children , but will the minister tell us how many childcare places the first 300 new or expanded nurseries will provide ? the government previously pledged to deliver 3,000 nurseries to support 100,000 childcare places . what will be the timeline for the delivery of the rest of those nurseries , and are the government still committed to the creation of 100,000 childcare places across the country in the long term ? the education secretary has confirmed that early years and childcare are her no . 1 priority , which i wholeheartedly support . however , the government ’s education tax will mean that children in classes in which one child is five years old , or is due to turn five by the end of the year , will be subject to the government ’s retrograde education tax regardless of their age . will the minister confirm that that is indeed a broken promise ? how can the british public trust the education secretary ’s word that she will prioritise early years and childcare when she has already broken a promise within the first 100 days of a labour government ? i thank the shadow minister for his response , and welcome him to his place . i know that he will want to be a keen champion for the early years sector , and i was glad to hear him welcome the update that i have given to the house . as i said in my statement , labour is committed to the delivery of expanded entitlement across government . the last government left significant challenges , but we are not shirking that responsibility . with labour , the early years sector can rest assured that we will be working tirelessly to deliver a wider sea change in early education , as well as high and rising standards throughout the education system . let me now deal with some of the hon . gentleman ’s specific points . it is clear to me from my consultation and engagement with parents and providers so far that we have inherited a pledge without a plan , and the consequences of that are inherited delivery challenges relating to workforce and places . i appreciate the points that the hon . gentleman made about the workforce ; i believe by resetting the relationship with the workforce , we can have a much more positive relationship with the sector in the future . over 300,000 children have benefited from the entitlement offer since september this year , which demonstrates that we are actively engaging and working with parents to promote opportunities to take up the offer . we will continue to do so . on school - based nurseries , the pilot during the testing phase is for 300 places from april . our ambition is for 3,000 places over the course of this parliament.[official report , i thank the minister for all the work he is doing to right a much overdue wrong . it is extraordinary to hear the shadow minister trying to claim credit for something this government have finally done today , putting to rest the concerns that many of us tried to raise with the previous government . i thank the minister for being honest enough to finally publish the data about the numbers of people we need working with our children to make these plans happen . the previous government always avoided the question and now we can see why , because the data shows that we will need an extra 35,000 people working in our childcare sector by autumn next year to fulfil all our pledges , and an extra 6,000 by the end of this year . will the minister tell us more about his workforce strategy ? we take our hats off to the people who look after our children . i know this government want to invest in them , but we need a lot more of them . what can we do to make that happen ? i thank my hon . friend for her tireless work speaking up for children , young people and parents up and down the country . as she rightly says , we are working hard with the early years sector to recruit the staff we need , including through the extended recruitment campaign do something big , so that we attract more people to work in the early education system and ensure there are good training pathways into careers in early education . we are resetting relationships with staff across the education sector to ensure they are respected and valued for the important work they do . school - based nurseries currently have lower turnover and have the option to use some staff flexibly between reception and early years in primary schools . i am looking forward to cracking on with delivering on those commitments . i call the liberal democrat spokesperson , who has two minutes . i am suffering because of the length of time that my hon . friend i thank the minister for sight of his statement . the liberal democrats believe that flexible , affordable childcare and early years education is a critical part of our society . high - quality early years education is the best possible investment in the future and contributes to economic performance in the present as well . most importantly , it is the most effective way to narrow the gap between rich and poor children . broadly , we welcome the government ’s promise to expand access to affordable childcare and early years education . under the previous government , we saw what happens when big promises on childcare are not backed up by the funding and resources needed to deliver them . the conservative government ’s plans risked exacerbating the problems that parents already faced : a lack of childminder places and eye - watering fees . the number of childminders in england fell by an estimated 26 % between 2018 and 2023 . last year , a report found that 35 % of nursery managers would limit the number of places they offered unless the government helped with recruitment . i note from the minister ’s statement that the government are taking steps to improve recruitment and retention in the childcare and early years sector , but does the minister agree that a career strategy is also needed for those working in early years , including a training programme , so that all those working with young children are properly trained and supported ? will he give assurances that the places announced today will be properly supported by committing to a full review of the rates paid to providers for free hours , to ensure they cover the actual costs of delivering that high - quality childcare ? i thank the hon . member for his statement and welcome him to his place . as he identified , there are some core challenges for the early years sector in delivering the government ’s agenda to expand childcare entitlement . as i made clear in my statement , today ’s announcement sets out key steps we are looking to take to deliver for children and ensure that they have safe , supported systems to help them succeed in life . i know that he will support our ambition of ensuring that every child , no matter where they come from , can succeed in life . the hon . member was right to focus on disadvantage , which is a key priority for me as a minister . if we are serious about breaking down barriers to opportunity , we need to think about the impact of the scheme on the most disadvantaged in our society . the number of childminders involved in the system has halved over the years ; we want to reset that relationship . the new flexibilities announced today will make a big difference . finally , he will appreciate that funding is a matter for the spending review . i thank the minister for finally bringing forward a realistic plan for expanding childcare . residents , and certainly parents , in southend west and leigh will welcome the announcement . will he provide assurances that childminders , who are a vital part of childcare arrangements , will still be a key focus ? will he give a further idea of how they will be supported ? childminders are a key part of the childcare market , providing more choice and flexibility for parents . from next month , the government plan to implement new flexibilities to help childminders join and stay in the profession . that will include enabling childminders to work from non - domestic premises , as i mentioned in my statement , and increasing the number of childminders who can work together ; that will improve children ’s access to new experiences out of the home and encourage socialisation . as we seek to deliver a sea change in our approach to early years , we want partners , including childminders , to work closely with us to push for better . i call the father of the house . there are countless millions of free childminders available . the love between a grandparent and a grandchild is the purest love : love without responsibility . i declare a personal interest . will the minister assure me that he will incentivise grandparents to look after their grandchildren , and that nothing in the tax or benefits system will discriminate against mothers who want to look after their children full time ? will he build on the conservatives ’ scheme of transferrable allowances ? families have an important role to play in supporting children in the first few years of their life . we are committed to breaking down barriers to opportunity for every child , in every part of the country , and our childcare system has a key role to play in that . as a former school governor and a dad , i see the amazing work that preschools and nurseries do up and down the country . these measures will be a key way to break down barriers to opportunity and get the country growing , as the minister says . will the minister commit to ensuring that children in care and the children of those in the armed forces are prioritised for the additional care places ? will he reassure childminders that we are on their side , because childminders in telford have missed the memo from the government on this set of improvements ? order . i remind hon . members to ask short questions . since joining the house , my hon . friend has already become a champion for children and young people in his constituency . he raises a number of points — about childminders , support for children in care , and military families . as i represent the heart and home of the royal navy , i take those matters very seriously . i will certainly consider the points that he raises as we design a system fit for the future . i am incredibly proud of the previous government ’s massive expansion of the childcare offer , and i am genuinely pleased that the new government are carrying on with it . when it comes to the expansion of in - school nurseries , what mechanism will be put in place to ensure that rural communities , like mine in mid buckinghamshire , get a locked in , fair share of those new facilities ? our party wants to govern the whole country . in the election in july , we won many rural seats , and we will take the views and ambitions of rural communities seriously . if the hon . gentleman wants to raise particular points with me to ensure that the roll - out works well in his constituency , i am very happy to meet him to discuss those issues . with so many families struggling to find affordable childcare across my hitchin constituency , i really welcome the minister ’s announcement today , and i will encourage local schools to take part in the pilot scheme . i particularly welcome the focus on the exclusionary nature of top - up fees . those fees run counter to the nature of the scheme , and all too often leave those most in need of affordable childcare unable to access it . will the minister assure us that as he takes the vital , robust action needed to clamp down on top - up fees , he will work with the sector more widely to ensure the viability of providers , who were all too often left on the brink by the previous government ’s mismanagement of childcare ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . i have heard that message loud and clear from parents in constituencies up and down the country . where providers seek to put up fresh barriers to access , we will not tolerate them . we will make guidance in this area as clear and consistent as possible to support hard - pressed families as we deliver this sea change in early years provision . i thank the minister for this welcome news . within seven months , my party colleagues in northern ireland have designed a scheme to slash childcare bills by 15 % , saving parents up to £ 660 per month . the northern ireland childcare subsidy scheme has saved parents about £ 1 million in the month of september alone . some 13,000 children signed up in the first four weeks . that is dup delivery . does the minister have any plans for implementing greater support on a uk - wide basis , so that better communication and better partnership can blossom and grow ? i always enjoy responding to questions from the hon . gentleman . on my visit in april to belfast , i heard that childcare is a huge issue for the community . i assure him that there is more we can do to support our colleagues in northern ireland . we have already committed to a meeting with the relevant minister to discuss these issues . i thank the minister for his statement and welcome these measures , which will do an awful lot to help hard - pressed families in my constituency . does he agree that the conservatives suffer from something of a blind spot in looking back at their record , which contains years in which funding fell short of the delivery costs ? they ignore the exodus of early years professionals and the fact that 1,400 sure start centres have been closed , yet they continue to believe that we have never had it so good . will the minister join me in thanking early years professionals in southampton itchen , who can finally count on a government who are child - centred , and could he outline how these measures will be targeted at so - called childcare deserts ? i thank my hon . friend for his question and congratulate him on being selected for the select committee . i agree that we should be shocked by the conservatives ’ response to today ’s statement . this government are focused on the issues that make the biggest difference to working people across the country , so that we can deliver the change we need . today ’s announcement is an example of how we will go about doing that . i am very keen to meet my hon . friend to discuss these issues further , and i appreciate his thanks to those in the sector for the hard work that they do in his constituency . i hugely welcome the news about funding for schools , children and parents , and for school - based nurseries in particular . i hope the minister will look fondly on applications from burnley , padiham and brierfield in due course . i wonder whether he thinks that the capital allocation in the statement is sufficient for his ambition . does the minister agree that this government are delivering on their promises within their first 100 days ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . i am absolutely delighted to hear of his enthusiasm for the scheme , which will make a huge difference to communities up and down our country . we are starting a test - and - learn phase in april ; the roll - out will be in september.[official report , i strongly welcome the proposed expansion of childcare , which i am sure will help many families in my penrith and solway constituency . can the minister outline how this measure will be targeted at the areas of the country with the greatest need , and at areas that are considered to be childcare deserts ? we are absolutely committed to being a child - centred government , and it is vital that we deliver the programme in the areas in most need . that means making sure that we understand where there are gaps in places and in the workforce , and we look forward to working closely with the sector to ensure that the scheme makes the biggest difference in communities that need it the most . this announcement is particularly fitting , as my son started preschool today . many hard - working parents in york outer welcome today ’s news , but many feel that some providers are taking the biscuit when it comes to funded hours , abnormalities , unfair top - up fees and even restrictions on the days of the week on which funded hours can be used . will the minister meet me so that i can pass on york outer parents ’ concerns about the funded hours scheme ? i am very happy to meet my hon . friend , and i wish his son good luck as he starts nursery today . i have sore calves after this morning , madam deputy speaker . a child - centred government are exactly what people in newcastle - under - lyme want , but the disgraceful state of special educational needs and disability provision in our schools means that we have more to do . how does this announcement , which i welcome , sit alongside our commitment to overhauling the send system ? i thank my hon . friend for his question . we are reviewing the early years send funding arrangements to ensure that they are suitable for supporting the needs of children with send . for children with more complex needs and an education , health and care plan , funding is available via the high needs block of the dedicated schools grant . local authorities should have send inclusion funding for children with low and emerging needs . disability access funding is also designed to support disabled children ’s access to entitlements . we can probably all agree that every child should have the opportunity to reach their full potential , regardless of their background and circumstances , who they know and where they come from . none of that should shape people ’s lives more than their talent , creativity or determination . i welcome the emphasis on the importance of early years provision . particularly in these years after the pandemic , measures such as early speech and language interventions can make all the difference . does the minister agree that now is the time to take early years provision seriously ? i thank my hon . friend for his question ; he is absolutely right . the pandemic had a huge impact on children ’s lives , and our investment in early interventions around speech and language is absolutely key . i look forward to working with him to deliver that successfully in his constituency . the final zinger of a question is from josh simons . we ’ll see ! i am intrigued to hear conservative members ’ attempts to defend their record . moments ago , i thank my hon . friend for his question . early years provision was cast off under the tories , and we are bringing it back into the fold as a crucial part of our education system . we are committed to giving every young person the best start in life , and i look forward to working with him to make that happen . i beg to move , that this house has considered the international investment summit . i am delighted to open this debate on the government ’s inaugural international investment summit , which we hosted at the guildhall in london on monday . leaders of the world ’s biggest companies , from alphabet and blackrock to goldman sachs and novo nordisk , came from all corners of the globe to meet government ministers and to listen to what our new government had to say . our message at the summit was clear : the uk is open for business once again . we have turned the page on the stagnation and instability of the previous government , and in just over 100 days , this government have put growth front and centre of our agenda and reassured investors that we will create the very best conditions for them to invest and to grow their businesses , restoring the economic stability and confidence for which businesses have been crying out for too long . the prime minister and the chancellor made it clear that the uk has an enormous amount to offer , as did all the high - profile investors who spoke at the summit , including esteemed business figures such as larry fink , eric schwartz , ruth porat and more . we have made clear our commitment to growth and restored economic stability , and we have given businesses the confidence that they need for the long term . businesses are safe in the knowledge that the uk at last has a government whose central mission is to grow the economy and stimulate private investment , thereby ending the chaos and churn of the last 14 years . as both the prime minister and the chancellor have set out , increasing investment into the uk is the government ’s no . 1 priority to drive growth . our mission - driven approach allows us to think in terms of years , not weeks , and to commit to the hard yards required to break down the silos that have too often prevented effective government and got in the way of real growth - driving change . this is about ambitious policymaking for the long term , not sticking - plaster politics . as the chancellor said earlier this week : “ if the challenge is growth , investment is the solution . ” i am delighted to say that , as a result of the stability dividend introduced by this government , we announced a record - breaking £ 63 billion of shovel - ready investments across the country — more than at any previous summit , and more than double the total of last year ’s summit — from global companies such as eli lilly , servicenow , holtec and many others . i welcome the government ’s success . could the minister tell us the proportion of that investment that came into play before the election ? the agreements were reached in the lead - up to the summit and at the summit itself . i am glad that the hon . gentleman joins us in congratulating the new government on securing £ 63 billion of shovel - ready investment . i lost count of the number of prime ministers , chancellors and home secretaries we had under his government . i was working in the private sector at the time , and i often heard from businesses that said they did not have the stability , or even the predictability , of government policymaking . will the minister give way ? i will not have a cross - chamber discussion with the hon . gentleman . i am sure he will make a contribution to the debate . this government are determined to increase the number of good , well - skilled jobs , to embrace the opportunities of technology and innovation , and to improve productivity across the country . at the international investment summit , we demonstrated that the uk has tremendous strengths . we have a dynamic , ambitious and globally connected economy that has long been at the forefront of global exploration , invention and innovation . we have a global language , a central time zone and a renowned legal system . we have a high - spending consumer market that benefits from an open economy . we have trade deals with over 70 countries , and we have world - class talent supported by our globally recognised higher education system , with four of the world ’s top 10 universities . one of my favourite moments of the summit was a panel chaired by our fantastic secretary of state for culture , media and sport on the creative industries and sport . i was delighted to have a photograph with gareth southgate , which i showed to my boys when i got home . in all seriousness , gareth southgate talked about how the premier league was once just an idea and how it has been built and marketed into a world leader , creating great investment into our economy . i am sure the whole house will support that sentiment — hear , hear . the shadow secretary of state is demonstrating that from a sedentary position — it is the first time i have said that in a debate for some time . when we took over from the last government , we recognised that there were issues we needed to address to improve the uk ’s competitiveness . that is why we have already announced a series of steps to improve our business environment , such as driving through planning reform to get britain building , removing the ban on onshore wind farms and giving the green light to key solar and data centre projects . we are also undertaking a pensions investment review , which the chancellor has asked me to lead , to harness the potential of our £ 2 trillion pension industry to unlock new capital for our innovative businesses , to drive growth and to improve outcomes for future pensioners . we have launched skills england to boost the nation ’s skills and fill job vacancies by bringing together businesses , trade unions , mayors , universities , colleges and training providers . we are also resetting our relationship with our closest partners in the european union . i , too , congratulate the government on an extraordinary achievement in securing £ 63 billion - worth of investment , which is a tremendous vote of confidence not only in this government but in this country . my hon . friend is right to say that a big part of this is the stability dividend , but she is also right to say that resetting our relationship with our closest neighbours in europe must also be a big source of appeal . did she hear that feedback at the investment summit ? indeed , i did . business wants the government to take a pragmatic approach , not an ideological approach , to our relationships with our main trading partners , and that is exactly what our new government are doing . i am pleased to report that we are not resting on our laurels ; far from it . on sunday , the business secretary announced the launch of an industrial strategy advisory council , which will be chaired by clare barclay , the ceo of microsoft uk . the business secretary also announced our modern industrial strategy green paper , setting out eight growth - driving sectors : advanced manufacturing ; clean energy industries ; creative industries ; defence ; digital and technology ; financial services ; life sciences ; and professional and business services . this is not about picking winners ; it is about building on the uk ’s unique strengths and untapped potential to enable our already world - leading services and manufacturing industries to adapt , grow and seize the opportunities to lead in new and emerging industries . at the summit , the prime minister set out the government ’s commitment to a pro - growth approach to competition and regulation , to create a dynamic business environment that will strengthen our foundations and help deliver our growth mission and industrial strategy . as investors made clear , they have a choice of where to invest . we must not rest on our laurels ; we must make sure that we forge ahead with these policies , because we need investors to make a positive choice to invest in our country . as one private sector speaker said at the summit , we do not want investors just to invest ; we want them to place a big bet on investing in the uk . the chancellor also confirmed two new innovative measures to ensure that our public finance institutions can better catalyse billions of pounds in private investment . we turbocharged the uk infrastructure bank to become the national wealth fund , which will have £ 27.8 billion to catalyse investment that would not have otherwise taken place . we have also launched the british business bank ’s new pathfinder british growth partnership , a vehicle to crowd pension fund investment and other institutional investment into venture capital funds and innovative businesses . we have committed to bringing forward a tax road map , long demanded by businesses across the economy , at the budget . this will give businesses the certainty and predictability to plan for the future . as the chancellor has already made clear , we will cap the rate of corporation tax at 25 % for the duration of this parliament . gone are the days when a government — the previous government — would announce a decrease in corporation tax , then announce an increase and then , months later , reverse the decision again at the next fiscal statement . we want to ensure that businesses have predictability . we have also said that we will maintain our capital allowances offer , with full expensing and a £ 1 million annual investment allowance . we will also reform and turbocharge the office for investment , which will sit under our new joint treasury - department for business and trade investment minister , poppy gustafsson , the founder and former ceo of darktrace . this is a clear demonstration of the government ’s commitment to better serving the needs of investors and breaking down the silos between departments , which have too often prevented transformative government policy . we are determined to drive the transformational investments that the country so desperately needs to fulfil its economic potential . such measures , introduced within just 100 days , show that this government are not just about warm words ; we mean business , in every sense of the phrase . this week ’s summit was a major vote of confidence in the uk ’s economic future and in this government ’s commitment to realising it . the investments and partnerships forged at the summit will have lasting impacts , driving growth , innovation and sustainability for years to come . it was not just a one - off event ; it was a first milestone in our ongoing work to build a deep and meaningful partnership with business , drive economic growth and create good jobs for working people up and down this country at all levels of society . as we move forward , let us work together across the house to ensure that the benefits of these investments are felt by all our citizens across every region of our great nation . before i finish , i want to say that the particular highlight of the summit for me was the evening reception at st paul ’s , at which his majesty the king was present and at which many of us were delighted to hear elton john , who had some very warm words to say about our new government . he said something like , “ we ’ve been in the doldrums for the last few years , but now we have a new government under the leadership of a new prime minister and things are looking up . ” as the chancellor made clear in her closing speech at the summit , since taking power this government have put unlocking private investment at the heart of everything we do . our investment summit demonstrated our commitment to growth and that the uk is once again open for business . i call the shadow secretary of state . may i welcome the minister back to this place and to her new position ? i assure her that i am very happy to work with her to further the best interests of the united kingdom . i very much welcome what happened on monday . having 300 investors come to this country is very welcome ; this country is clearly open for business . we are keen to help the government to succeed , because it is in everybody ’s interests . i speak not only as a constituency mp , but as a former businessperson . i was also pleased to hear the prime minister talk about cutting red tape and regulation . we would all welcome that , although i have some questions . we know that there is a bottleneck in our economy , particularly in planning and infrastructure , so we will welcome any changes that the government can successfully make to accelerate the projects that have been held up by problems . we also welcome the work — for which i understand the minister is responsible in her other role as minister for pensions — on the mansion house compact and the mansion house reforms , which could liberate £ 75 billion of capital into our productive economy . that is much needed : only 3 % or 4 % is invested today in equities , compared with 50 % a couple of decades ago , so it is very important that we continue the reforms started by the last government . we were pleased to see all the positivity on monday , despite the gloom and doom that we have heard from government members in recent weeks . it is good to hear investors saying that now is the right time to invest in the uk . we can see why . [ laughter . ] no , it is not necessarily because there is a labour government . it is because inflation is running at below 2 % , whereas it was running at 11 % only two years ago . in this country we have only 4 % unemployment , our economy is growing as fast as any other in the g7 and our deficit stands at 4.4 % . that is what we handed over to the minister ’s government . the deficit was higher than we would have liked , but in 2010 , by comparison , it stood at more than 10 % . we constantly hear from labour members the refrain that they inherited the worst economic situation in history , but that is simply not the case . i am happy to take an intervention from the minister , or any other government member , on that point . if they can name a single metric that is worse today than in 2010 , i will be happy to hear it . rose — the chair of the business and trade committee is going to give us one . the hon . gentleman gives way with characteristic generosity . the truth is that the international monetary fund forecast growth for this year at about 0.5 % , that families were about £ 1,200 worse off on average at the last election than in 2019 , and that since 2010 the national debt has more than doubled , to £ 2.3 trillion . i suggest that those three metrics represent not a good inheritance , but a bad one . there is no doubt that we have been through a difficult time , given the effect of covid and the cost of living crisis on a services economy , but the right hon . gentleman will acknowledge that back in 2010 the deficit was more than 10 % , whereas today it is only 4 % . in real terms , adjusted for inflation , that is a difference of about £ 160 billion , the equivalent of the health budget . the inheritance left for the present government is much better than the one we received in 2010 . the shadow secretary of state is being generous to a point . i suggest kindly that in 2010 the outgoing labour government did not leave a £ 22 billion in - year hole in the public finances , as the conservative government bequeathed to us . the minister is a very sensible person with experience both in the private sector and in politics , so i am surprised that she mentions that figure . of the £ 22 billion , £ 9 billion was a result of her government ’s actions in lifting public sector pay without any commensurate productivity improvements and in scrapping the rwanda scheme . it is fake news to say that there is a £ 22 billion black hole , i am afraid , and the minister absolutely knows it . there is no doubt that there are tough spending decisions and tough choices to be made , but it is very disappointing that one of the government ’s tough choices has been to scrap the winter fuel allowance . let us see what their other choices will be . does the shadow secretary of state acknowledge that the cost of government borrowing that this government have inherited is roughly double what it was in 2010 ? that is , in part , a direct result of the disastrous liz truss mini - budget . that is simply not true — just read what the bank of england said about that time . all the numbers went back to normal within a month of that fiscal event . the hon . gentleman can choose his opinions , but he can not choose his facts . let us look at some facts . of course we welcome the £ 63 billion that has been announced , but as the minister and her government stand on a platform of honesty and transparency , let us put some honesty and transparency around the numbers . the amazon £ 8 billion was announced on by spring this year , financial markets had already priced in the fact that they expected a large labour victory , and that was what gave businesses and the markets so much confidence in the future stability of our economy . will the shadow secretary of state explain why ? i will come on to confidence in a second , if i may . the reality is that the uk has always been a good place for foreign investors . for the past three years , it has been no . 3 in the world for foreign direct investment ; the only countries ahead of us have been the us and china . the minister referred to the wonderful event at the guildhall . we have wonderful places to host international events , and we support what they do to show the best of britain to our international investors . i was pleased , but perhaps surprised , to see elton john entertaining the audience ; i was expecting taylor swift . was that ever on the agenda ? there is obviously a very strong relationship there . but when i thought about it , and when i heard about the reversal of position on the dp world investment , i thought , “ well , it ’s obvious why they ’ve done that : they ’ve asked elton and the transport secretary to join in a duet of ‘ sorry seems to be the hardest word ’ . ” interestingly , a no.10 press release on this mentioned a rogue operator — i was not sure whether that meant the secretary of state or the company — so i am not sure where that all landed in the end , or whether that was just a rogue comment by the secretary of state . none the less , we welcome the investment and we will absolutely support any successes that the government can achieve , but , as the opposition , it is right that we challenge where challenge is due . we have many concerns about some of the things to which the minister refers . she is absolutely right to say that stability is the key . it breeds confidence in investors , which breeds investment . that is why we are particularly concerned about the changes to business taxation . some were floated months ago and have been left hanging in the air . we know that this is now affecting investment , particularly around capital gains tax and around business relief — it used to be called business property relief — which is very close to my heart . business relief gives private businesses and businesses listed on aim the ability to pass on their assets to the next generation without inheritance tax . there are a number of questions around whether that relief will be continued . it is hugely important that the government do continue it , because it affects some of this country ’s fantastic family businesses , which generate around £ 200 billion of tax receipts every single year and employ nearly 14 million people . that business relief is there for a reason . it is not a tax loophole ; it is an incentive for family and intergenerational businesses to pass on their assets from one generation to the next . similarly , that happens with agricultural property relief . we are also concerned about the government ’s unwillingness to confirm that there will be no rise in national insurance for employers . members on both sides of the house have described that as a jobs tax , and that is exactly what it is . all the uncertainty around business taxation will mean a suspension of investment and a reduction in the amount of hiring , particularly when it is seen in conjunction with the potential workplace changes that the government are making , which we will debate in the house on monday and about which we have great concerns . in particular , those relating to union powers could take this country back to the 1970s . i know that many members in this place will not remember the 1970s , but i do and it was not a good place to be . in the prime minister ’s statement , he talked about cutting red tape . if , as currently drafted , the 28 new regulations — particularly those for small and medium - sized enterprises — are added to the employment rights bill , it would seriously damage growth , investment and smes . but the minister does not need to take my word for that . let me read out some of the comments about the changes that the government are thinking of making that will damage investment . the federation of small businesses said that its members are viewing the measures coming down the line with “ trepidation ” . tina mckenzie described them as “ clumsy , chaotic and poorly planned . ” she said : “ there are already 65,000 fewer payroll jobs since labour took power , and the new government is sending out troubling signals to businesses and investors . ” those are her words , not mine . the institute of directors said that confidence is fizzling out . its index in relation to investor appetite has gone from plus 30 % in june 2024 to minus 7 % in october 2024 . that is in just four months . the cbi said that 62 % of employers say that the uk will be a less attractive place in which to invest . ernst & young said that “ 60 % of asset management ( private equity ) clients have asked them to start work on moving abroad . ” does the hon . member agree that he is now guilty of talking down the entrepreneurial spirit and the ability of uk companies to cope with an exciting new government ? i am very keen not to do that . that is my point . it is gloom and doom from the opposition — sorry , i mean the government ; i have to stop doing that — and it is brought on by these significant changes . these are not my comments , but the comments of sensible business representative organisations , which are representing their members . we should listen to the voices of business in this context . even richard walker of iceland food , one of the government ’s supporters , says that the changes must happen slowly to avoid a “ disastrous impact ” . i realise that we have a lot to get used to these days . i have to get used to calling those on the labour benches “ the government ” , and i also have to get used to being a backseat driver . it is even more frustrating being a backseat driver when the learner driver in the driving seat does not know the difference between the brake and the accelerator . importantly , stability is one of the key levers that the government have at their disposal . winston churchill once said that some people see “ private enterprise as a predatory tiger to be shot . some see it as a cow that they can milk . few people see it for what it really is — the strong horse that pulls the whole cart ” . it is hugely important that we get behind private enterprise in this country . it is hugely important that we get that stability in tax policy , workplace policy and the employment relationship . it is hugely important that we continue to level up this country . i note that levelling - up seems to have disappeared as a departmental aim , but that is still hugely important to all parts of this country , not least to the part of the country that i represent . it is also hugely important that we control energy costs . we know that that is a key concern to many businesses around the uk . another key concern is that we cut the red tape for our larger companies . the area that i focused most on as a business minister was smes , which are the backbone of our economy . the no . 1 area that they struggle with is access to finance . i would really like to see some different measures in that area . on that point about finance , i was pleased to see that jp morgan , which has its headquarters in my constituency , joined other big banks in the world to back the push to invest in the uk ahead of the summit . does the hon . member agree with jp morgan and those banks that we should be optimistic about the future of the british economy following the election ? i would not necessarily say “ following the election ” , but , generally , we should be very positive about our economy . i set out earlier some of the economic conditions that would make it conducive to invest in the uk , and we should be proud of that situation . i welcome the minister ’s comments about the change of priorities of the british business bank , specifically in relation to the pathfinder initiative . that piece of work was started by my hon . friend as i look , with a mixture of sadness and joy , at the now redundant conservative party manifesto , i can see that there were some really positive ideas in there about easing finance for smes . in particular , i am referring to things such as regional mutual banks , which is a policy that the labour government should adopt , and the open finance and smart data revolution for our economy , which could transform the opportunities of sme finance , making it much easier for smes to shop around . however , the key thing that i would reiterate to the minister and her team is that they need to make sure that we have stability in terms of not just work , but business taxation , capital gains tax , and business relief . i say no to a jobs tax , but , yes to stability and business taxes . i say no to taking us back to the 1970s , by giving unions more power , no to doom and gloom , and yes to a positive and optimistic view of the uk ’s future in the world . i call jade botterill to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to deliver my maiden speech in this important debate on international investment , the benefits of which will be felt right across all regions of our country . i want to begin by paying tribute to my predecessor , mark eastwood . he was a dedicated servant to his previous constituency of dewsbury . on behalf of myself and our community , i say thank you . being the member for the area in which i grew up is truly the honour of my life . i will forever be grateful to the people across ossett and denby dale who put their faith in me to represent the area that i proudly call home . i pay tribute to the labour members across the constituency , especially stalwart member robert gosling , without whom i would not be standing here today . i would also like to take the opportunity to thank my parents for their support , as well as my brother , who has always been there for me during some of the most challenging times . i am delighted that they have travelled from wakefield to be in the public gallery today . their own commitment to our community in their long careers of public service — working hard and talking straight — are principles that i hope to emulate here . my mum is so committed to the north that this is her first ever trip to london — proof , were it ever needed , that us northerners only come south if somebody makes us . i know many members have already spoken about the beauty of their patches , but with respect , i must make the case for ossett and denby dale . driving from ossett towards the wakefield rural villages and into denby dale , the sky widens and the moors roll out before you . on that drive , when i see the emley moor mast appear from the horizon , built taller than the eiffel tower , i know i am home . it is beautiful , it is yorkshire and it is the place that made me who i am today . it is not just those moors and views that move me ; it is also the people who call them home . we are people of talent , community and , as good yorkshire folk say , hard graft . in fact , that beautiful landscape is the fruit of exactly that graft , of that talent . you see it in the pits dug across the countryside that served to fuel and heat our nation . you see it in the fields — ploughed , planted and grazed by countless generations to feed not just yorkshire but the rest of the country . you see it in the town markets , which have bustled with small traders , craftsmen and local farmers for generations . that landscape is not just the cradle of talent , but a product of it . each town , each village has its own community , its own culture — all quietly , proudly distinct . as well as hard work , these towns and villages are famous for their culture , their creativity and their heritage — home to brass bands , morris dancers , maypoles and even a doctor who , but most importantly of all , the world ’s greatest rugby league team , wakefield trinity . labour may be a party of the union , but in west yorkshire , when it comes to rugby , we watch the proper stuff and as you will know , madam deputy speaker , that is league . we are also home to yorkshire sculpture park , with its barbara hepworths and henry moores , and the national coal mining museum , which roots us in our proud history . i am enthusiastic — sometimes maybe a little too enthusiastic — that my constituency contains so many wonderful pubs and brewers . we have the ever expanding ossett brewery and our famous yearly festival , ossett beercart . just as we work hard and play hard , we also pie hard . indeed , for over 200 years , the people of denby dale have marked special occasions in the only way i think appropriate : by baking enormous pies to feed thousands — some even as long as 40 feet , with nine tonnes of filling and 200 pints of bitter . that history and that culture must be championed . it is yorkshire culture ; it is our culture . but i refuse to talk about my community only in the past tense — about opportunities we used to have and industries we used to lead . indeed , i want my successors in this place to be celebrating the creativity and achievements of children being born in my constituency today . sadly , however , the social mobility commission recently reported that many young people in ossett and denby dale , and other post - industrial communities across our nation , face an uphill battle . growing up in a rural town , i know that feeling all too well : that the place you are from is overlooked — forgotten , even ; that opportunities are few and far between ; and that the only path to success in life is leaving your family , your friends , your home . after briefly living in london in my twenties for work , i remember feeling like the token northerner with the funny accent . i found myself having to speak eloquently so folk down here could actually understand me . the only problem with that was that when i got back home , my friends and family would ask me why i was speaking so posh . it actually made me feel quite lost . young people in ossett and denby dale , and in towns and villages across our country , should not feel like they have to get out to get ahead — and yet so many of them do . to talk solely about what was once possible in our community is to betray those young people . instead , our politics must be built on their dreams and on their potential : decent , secure jobs with reliable public transport to get them there ; good affordable housing where they can build their families and their future ; high - quality education and skills training ; access to creativity and culture ; aspiration , hope . when they see the sky widen and the moors roll out before them , with emley moor mast standing tall on the horizon , young people should see somewhere that is ready to be remade once more by their talent , by their graft , by them . england is a nation of towns and villages like mine — of community , of culture , of graft . for england to succeed , towns and villages must succeed , and it will be my mission in this place to see that happen . i welcome the minister to her place . i also thank her for her support when she was not in this place and i was further back on these benches , and we worked together on some of the issues under focus today . we liberal democrats want britain to be one of the most attractive places in the world for business to invest . we want to see responsible , sustainable businesses investing in tackling the climate emergency and creating jobs , growth and wealth , some of which should be invested into our health , education and public services . i welcome the government deciding to hold an international investment summit within their first 100 days . it sends an excellent signal to the world that uk plc is open for business , and we liberal democrats welcome and support that move . we welcome , too , the announcements about the revival of the industrial strategy and a new strategy for the british business bank . we look forward to scrutinising those plans as a constructive opposition . however , we also know that this government have to rebuild not only the economy , but our country ’s reputation . it is an enormous relief that some of the dark days of the last government are — i hope — behind us . we had the tweeting diplomacy of two former prime ministers , which made us look like a small country on the international stage . we had the half - baked brexit deal , which has wrapped up small businesses in red tape and reams of paperwork . we had the rolling back on net zero and the flip - flopping fiasco on hs2 , which created uncertainty , scared off investors and put the jobs of the future at risk . we also had the sheer incompetence of a government who had forgotten how to negotiate . in my former role as my party ’s health spokesperson , talking to some of the pharmaceutical companies involved in the voluntary scheme for branded medicines , pricing and access negotiations , it became patently clear that many were putting their investment abroad and not in this country . that investment was lost on the conservatives ’ watch . even though i welcome many of the things that the labour government have proposed and are bringing forward , there are some notable gaps , and it is on those gaps that i wish to focus . we know today ’s debate is about international investment , but i urge the government to think about local investment in this country too . small businesses are the engine of growth and the backbone of our economy . they are the heartbeat of our communities , but they are really struggling to invest . there is one major reason for that : the broken business rates system . it is absolutely absurd that small bricks and mortar businesses on our high streets up and down the country see their business rates going up while amazon warehouses see their business rates going down . it is a disgrace . i urge the labour government , in the strongest possible terms , to make the budget this autumn the final one in which business rates are a permanent feature . they should be scrapped and replaced with a commercial landowner levy . i urge the labour government to act on that as soon as possible . to make it even worse , we know that in many parts of the country , where high streets are not in a good state , there are small businesses that want to invest in good environmental things . they want to invest in solar panels , insulation , ventilation and bike sheds — things that would be good for business and create a sense of community , tackle the climate emergency and improve the public realm . yet if they invest in those things , their business rates can go up . that is absolutely nuts , and i urge all colleagues to get behind my call to make the upcoming budget the final one in which business rates are a permanent feature . the other point i will talk about is skills . the government have talked a lot about investing in infrastructure , housing and big things that we can build , but skills are so important . in my constituency , we have a phenomenal organisation called gem cable solutions , a leading defence and aerospace company that makes bespoke cables and fibre optics using precision manufacturing . that means individual people making handmade cables that are flying things into space — it is extraordinary . but can the company get the highly qualified engineers that it needs in this country ? no , it often can not , because we are competing on the international stage for some of the finest engineering talent . at the same time , under the last government , the company could not get that talent from abroad either , so i urge the new government to bring forward a skills strategy as soon as possible , consult with other parties , and ensure that our small businesses can get those skills . my third point is about the climate jobs of the future . i know the uk infrastructure bank has been rebranded the national wealth fund , and has attracted £ 7.3 billion in funds already . i would be grateful if the minister could confirm whether the new wealth fund will have an explicit remit to support the uk ’s transition to net zero carbon emissions . finally , it is no secret that brexit has wrapped up our small businesses in red tape , and that they are dealing with reams of paperwork . we have to remove as many trade barriers to our small businesses as possible . i urge the government to bring something forward on that front as soon as possible . i call sarah russell to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for allowing me to make my maiden speech . when i drive around my congleton constituency , i thank my lucky stars that i have the privilege of both living in and representing somewhere so very beautiful . it is made up of gorgeous rolling countryside , farmland , hedgerows and oak trees . the farmers work all hours to produce the food that we need . it has views of the giant radio telescope at jodrell bank and the natural beauty spot bosley cloud . it is arcadia within commuting distance of manchester , crewe and stoke , and i can not tell the house how much i truly love it . the constituency is a growing place , with around 5,000 extra houses in the last few years . the population is divided between the cheshire market towns of alsager , sandbach and congleton , alongside the larger village of holmes chapel , and many beautiful smaller villages , such as rode heath , church lawton and goostrey . there can be few more idyllic spots in the country than sitting outside the swettenham arms next to the lovell arboretum , overlooking st peter ’s , the archetypal village church . though each town and village has its own unique character and history , the joys and challenges experienced by the families who live there are often remarkably similar . they include families whose children have special educational needs and disabilities , who often face extensive challenges getting the diagnoses and support that they need . those families need our help , and i will do everything that i can to assist them . i have been pleased to hear the prime minister referring repeatedly in this chamber to those difficulties , and i am confident that he will help us too . families will also benefit from labour ’s review of shared parental leave . some 54,000 women a year lose their job when they are pregnant or on maternity leave . women actually out - earn men in their 20s . the gender pay gap is in many respects actually a motherhood penalty . men taking longer periods of paternity leave is a way that we could normalise parental leave and potentially reduce those problems . i thank the government for starting the consultation on this matter imminently . i pay tribute to campaign groups such as pregnant then screwed , rights of women , the dad shift , parenting out loud , and the tuc and trade unions , which are all doing incredible things in this field . many homeowners in my constituency have been affected by leasehold and fleecehold problems , and will welcome our planned reforms on these issues , to which i intend to contribute . they include older people , often the backbone of our communities , who provide childcare for grandchildren , and often volunteer as well . sometimes , however , they do so in avoidable pain while on nhs waiting lists that are too long . those are just a few of the issues that i intend to apply myself to as mp for congleton . let me take the house back to congleton ’s history . congleton is known as beartown , owing to a local story that in the 1600s the town saved up to buy a new bible . shortly before the summer fête , the village bear died , so the townsfolk agreed that rather than buy their bible they would postpone the purchase and get a new bear with the money instead . congleton is very entrepreneurial across the whole constituency , and many of our small businesses feature references to the bear . it is also in our local iconography everywhere . we have the beartown tap and beartown beer . the bear features pretty much everywhere , as does our fantastic statue of elizabeth wolstenholme - elmy , which was lobbied and fundraised for by local feminists . elizabeth , who based herself in congleton from 1874 until her death in 1918 , played a significant role in the women ’s suffrage movement , founding the women ’s social and political union and campaigning for women ’s education and voting rights . i hope that i shall think of her often in this place . another of our most famous local figures , although quite different , is harry styles , whose hometown of holmes chapel is now a point of pilgrimage for his fans . i am sure that everyone is sorry to hear today of the death of his former bandmate liam payne — we all extend our condolences to his friends and family . local people have set up a walking trail associated with harry styles . if anyone fancies it , i would strongly recommend following it , with a stop in any of our local independent businesses on holmes chapel high street . i would probably include a drink at the george and dragon or the bottle bank , or both . i know that both publicans do a lot of voluntary work within our community . people volunteering is common in my constituency , as i know it is in the constituencies of many other members . whether they are coaching football at vale juniors or any of the other community sports clubs — there are too many for me to list — planting trees and conserving and maintaining our woodland and footpaths , as the sandbach woodland and wildlife group does , and as a similar group does in congleton ; helping young people through uniformed groups such as scouts , guides and the various air cadets , some of which i have visited ; running schemes to support men ’s mental health , such as the goostrey community shed , holmes chapel men in sheds , or the new sandbach men walking and talking group ; or even running a community energy power plant in congleton hydro , we have the most amazing set of citizens . i am so grateful for the fantastic contribution that they make to help others , support those who need it , and truly make my constituency the fantastic place that it is . on the topic of contribution , i pay tribute to my predecessor , fiona bruce . congleton has had three mps in its history , all of them women : ann winterton , fiona bruce and now me . i know that many christians in the constituency and beyond appreciated fiona bruce ’s advocacy on behalf of the religious community , both in the uk and internationally , in her role as envoy for religious freedom . we have many active local church groups in our community , and they contribute a great deal of very varied support . churches and secular volunteers and organisations , including food banks , food pantries and the old saw mill , are all quietly providing much - needed food support within the community . they do this for a far larger number of adults and children than the apparent affluence of the area would superficially lead one to expect . as a discrimination lawyer , and someone who went into politics because of the value that i place on equality and inclusion , i will continue to advocate for the rights and freedoms of all my constituents , and celebrate the diversity within our community . i recently attended the one world festival in alsager , which was first established by margaret keeling 30 years ago . it celebrates the diversity of nationalities living within the alsager community , with food , activities and lots of performances from local schoolchildren . it really is a delight — thank you , margaret . another of the many achievements of the fantastic volunteers in my constituency is that we have regular pride events . congleton held its first pride about five years ago . i pay tribute to richard walton , ronan clayton and all those who were involved in setting it up . it is now ably chaired by malcolm pope , who is taking it from strength to strength . the excellent curator anna maluk put on a pride exhibition in congleton museum , hosting photos from those early events and featuring art from the local lgbtqia+ community . since then , more pride events have grown in sandbach , alsager and , for the first time this summer , holmes chapel . at one of these events , it was suggested to me that these are really just a family fun day — a village fête , if you will . it is true that the events are fun , fabulous and family - friendly , but beyond the live music and bright clothing there remains a serious message . the hard - working volunteers who make these pride events happen do so in the face of repeated homophobic hate crimes . similarly , there is still a backdrop of fear attendant in many women ’s daily lives . women in my constituency have written or spoken to me about their experiences of sexual violence . i say to the young women who have talked to me — you know who you are — that i will fight for you , and all young people , in this place every day . that will include ensuring that , when embracing new technology and innovation , as we have done this week at the international investment summit , we find ways of protecting people from new threats — whether that be people looking at tractors on their smartphones in this workplace , or artificial intelligence baking in discriminatory decision making . unfortunately , new technologies also bring the potential for harassment , discrimination and abuse , and we must not be caught off guard — we must get on the front foot on that . my constituency has a long history of developing new technologies . the constituency boundary bisects the site of jodrell bank , the amazing radio telescope . sandbach was the proud home of erf and foden trucks . the first foden traction engine was built in sandbach in 1881 , and that was followed by the production of heavy goods vehicles for 150 years . the history and heritage of foden still runs through the blood of the town , with the annual transport festival and its incredible parade of vintage trucks , wagons , classic cars and even the odd plane on the common . my constituency is also home to one of the world ’s leading brass bands , foden ’s band , which was born out of the works in 1902 and has twice won , and twice been runner - up , in the national brass band championships of great britain . i will work across this house to stand up for the incredible , entrepreneurial and community - minded people and businesses of the beautiful place that is the congleton constituency . lastly , i want to say some thank yous . i thank the volunteers who helped me to get here and continue to support me , to whom i am very grateful . that includes those from the labour party , and i make special mention of the fabian women ’s network mentoring scheme . i thank my adored family , who are in the public gallery today . when i am in westminster , i miss you so much . i hope i do all of you proud . i pay tribute to those who have made their maiden speeches today . i think we all felt the passion and emotion in the beautiful speech by i will continue being nice to the opposition — the government ! yes , the government — i have picked up that habit from my hon . friend and i do apologise . i am impressed by what has been achieved at the international investment summit . within weeks of allegedly receiving the worst economic inheritance of any incoming government since the second world war , labour has supposedly secured billions of pounds of investment . that is frankly unbelievable , and not because i doubt our country ’s ability to attract investment . britain is a tremendous place to invest , as a wealthy , free , fair and talented nation where people can do business and thrive . that is why britain ’s foreign direct investment stock grew to more than £ 2 trillion throughout successive conservative governments — more than france , germany and italy combined . my scepticism is about the idea that the government , who appointed a minister for investment only four days before the summit , secured every penny of the investment . as anyone in business will tell us , the devil is in the details , and a quick inspection will confirm that most of the investment was in progress thanks to the last conservative government . let us look at clean energy , for example . britain secured much of the investment that the government claim credit for thanks to a conservative policy : contracts for difference . without that market mechanism , under which investors bid for a guaranteed price , we would not have secured as much investment as cheaply for bill payers . it is why we have the world ’s four largest offshore wind farms off our coast , why renewables generate 44 % of our electricity today compared with 7 % in 2010 , and why the uk was able to close its last coal - fired power plant this year . that is a conservative record , as much as labour might envy it . the government have done the easy bit in tallying the figures and taking credit for someone else ’s work . admittedly , that is a harder task when no . 10 is in such disarray and the minister had only two days to prepare for the summit . in fairness , only time will tell if the summit was a success and the relationships built there lead to more investment beyond what was already on its way . but that is the hard bit , because to secure more investment and compete globally , britain needs to be light on regulation and low in taxes . although the prime minister talked about removing “ needless regulation ” and being “ open for business , ” his government ’s actions say otherwise . despite labour ’s explicit manifesto pledge not to increase national insurance , the chancellor is drawing up plans to hike the tax for employers . make no mistake : that would be a tax on jobs , and would make it more expensive for firms to hire , which would impact on businesses big and small , including in my constituency — from bombardier in biggin hill to pubs and cafés in hayes and the churchill theatre in bromley . the tax hike may fall on employers , but working people will pay the price as job opportunities shrink and pay rises are limited . the hands of businesses will be tied further by what the government themselves brand the biggest increase in employment regulation in a generation . while the government plan to tax jobs and pass french - style union laws , a cabinet minister took a more explicit anti - business approach . the transport secretary admitted that she has been boycotting a ferry company for two and a half years , and encouraged others to do the same . while the prime minister glad - handed investors — promising less red tape and openness to business , and was careful to mention tax only once — his government are delivering exactly the opposite . britain faces a more significant problem : keeping up as technology advances . leading on artificial intelligence , quantum , engineering biology or semiconductors is vital to our future prosperity and security , but we face considerable challenges in doing so . for example , britain is home to the largest number of foundational models and generative al start - ups in europe , but we lack the compute power that we need to build and run al models . the previous conservative government recognised that problem and planned to build a new supercomputer in edinburgh 50 times more powerful than our current top - end system , but labour has now cancelled that £ 800 million investment . that is yet another example of labour ’s actions not matching its rhetoric . the government can not be in favour of growth while cancelling investment . they can not cut regulations while planning huge increases in red tape for employment . they can not support jobs while preparing to tax their creation . and they can not claim to have the worst economic inheritance while copying and championing the work of their conservative predecessors . if the government do not get their story straight , investors will almost certainly stay away . i call callum anderson to make his maiden speech . it is with deep humility that i rise for the first time in this house as the member of parliament for the new buckingham and bletchley constituency , and i am pleased to contribute to this debate . i congratulate my hon . friends the members for ossett and denby dale ( jade botterill ) and for congleton ( mrs russell ) on their excellent speeches . their constituents are fortunate to have such formidable representatives . i should of course begin my remarks by paying tribute to my two direct predecessors . in iain stewart , this chamber had a calm , measured advocate for the former milton keynes south constituency who , among other things , consistently championed better transport connections for the city and the united kingdom more broadly . i also thank although buckingham and bletchley is a new constituency for this parliament , it is in fact a reunion of old friends . for nearly a century , those communities were connected as one , but in 1983 , milton keynes , along with bletchley , had the temerity to split away and flourish into the formidable modern city that it is today . although the towns of buckingham , bletchley and winslow are different in character , all have deep - rooted , rich histories . and between those towns lie many villages , breathing life into the heart of our constituency . be it westbury , quainton , stewkley or nash — i could go on — all contribute to the fabric of our collective identity , and i must never forget tattenhoe in milton keynes . although each community is unique , they share common values : a deep sense of civic pride , patriotism and a belief that opportunity should be available to everyone if they work hard . i pledge to serve each of them with the same level of diligence , be they urban or rural and regardless of their size or affluence . one of the great privileges of representing bletchley is that i carry the legacy of bletchley park and the remarkable codebreakers who worked there in the 1940s . the ingenuity and tireless efforts of those brave women and men — including alan turing , a very british hero — who together uncovered key strategic military plans of the nazis , not only shortened the second world war and saved countless lives , but laid the foundation of today ’s technological age . that is why bletchley park remains an iconic institution of national and global significance , and why it was such a fitting host for the ai summit last year . that legacy of technology and creative thinking remains at bletchley ’s core today . as we speak , the south central institute of technology is inspiring the next generation , providing young people with the skills to thrive in the digital age . the expertise does not end there : the university of buckingham is innovating in higher education , enabling students to pursue accelerated degrees and equipping them with the agility and knowledge to navigate an ever - changing world . just as bletchley and buckingham lead in education , silverstone — of which the southern half of the track is located in my constituency — leads on the world stage for motorsport . it convenes the best drivers , including our very own sir lewis hamilton and lando norris , alongside cutting - edge engineers , technologists and designers . silverstone is where the pinnacle of innovation meets the thrill of competition , and inward international investment has been pivotal to achieving that status . from formula 1 teams to global technology giants , international investors are choosing britain because they see a country where creativity , innovation and entrepreneurship can flourish . but the value of international investment is not just financial ; it is also a vote of confidence in us — in our workforce , our infrastructure and our unique creative spirit . it strengthens our relationships with key global players , ensuring that we continue to be the country that others seek out for collaboration , whether in emerging fields such as artificial intelligence or established ones such as financial services and advanced manufacturing . that is why this government ’s achievement in securing the commitment of £ 63 billion of private investment , 10 % of which will help turbocharge britain ’s ai capacity , is so important . i congratulate my right hon . and hon . friends across government on their hard work to secure that historic investment . but , madam deputy speaker , the buckingham and bletchley constituency offers so much more . farmers and rural businesses across north buckinghamshire work tirelessly to feed our nation , using the latest methods to produce high - quality food while safeguarding our local environment , as i saw at first hand when i met the edgcott and winslow young farmers earlier this summer . i am committed to being their advocate in the house , ensuring that they receive the support and recognition that they deserve . if the house will indulge me for a few more moments , i want to close my maiden speech by thanking the people who believed in me and supported me on my journey to this place . first and foremost , i owe an unpayable debt to my mother , who brought me up alone in a council flat and sacrificed everything to help her son reach heights that neither of us could have dreamed of 33 years ago — be that the city of london or the home of our democracy — and whose simple values of hard work and quiet perseverance taught me that everyone has value and deserves respect . her example has been a guiding light to me , and for that i will be forever grateful . there are so many others to whom i also owe so much , be they family members , my partner of 10 years , or my friends of 15 , 20 and 30 years — all of which i mention to warn my constituents that i generally invest only in the most long - term of relationships . it is on that note that i wish to address the young people in the towns , villages and city that comprise the buckingham and bletchley constituency : regardless of who your parents are , where you come from or what you look like , never stop believing that if you work hard , anything in britain is possible . every moment i am granted in this place will be spent working towards ensuring that you have the power to write your own life story and live the life that you have imagined for yourself on these islands of ours . that is the britain i believe in , and the one i will be fighting for . i call sean woodcock to make his maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i start by congratulating my hon . friend i want to start by saying what an honour it is to stand here as the member of parliament for banbury . as a banbury lad who has never sought to represent anywhere else , i want to repeat what i told residents on the doorstep during the campaign : this is the job i have always wanted . to everyone who helped make that happen , i can only say thank you . i also want those residents to know that now i have this job , i promise that i will work hard every day to deliver for them , whether they voted for me or not . what makes this an even prouder moment for me is that i stand here as the first labour member of parliament for the banbury constituency . until banbury is a beautiful part of the world to live in and represent . it is most famous for our nursery rhyme , known across the english - speaking world : “ ride a cock - horse to banbury cross , to see a fine lady upon a white horse ; with rings on her fingers and bells on her toes , she shall have music wherever she goes . ” banbury ’s history is more than that , though ; indeed , it is more than just the town itself . the constituency reflects our country ’s history , including in its foundations and its landscape . we have the neolithic and bronze age rollright stones ; the settlement on the edge of chipping norton left to us by the romans ; the norman castle mound at deddington ; and broughton castle which , as well being a stunning late - medieval stately home , is likely to be recognisable to many members as the setting for tv ’s “ wolf hall ” , and the films “ shakespeare in love ” and “ three men and a little lady ” . i was once told that one of the only requests to film there that the owners declined was when the studio wanted to paint it pink , which was probably wise . in the village of wroxton , where i went to school , we have the former home of lord north . he is also buried in wroxton , giving us something that not all constituencies have : the resting place of a former prime minister . bliss mill , tooley ’s boatyard and the oxford canal are all remnants of the area ’s growth during the industrial revolution . but the most colourful time in our history is undoubtedly the civil war , when banbury itself was on the side of the roundheads , despite its castle — right in the middle of the town — being on the side of the cavaliers . the people of banbury were so unmistakably puritan that a poem was written about it : “ to banbury came i , o profane one ! where i saw a puritane - one , hanging of his cat on monday , for killing of a mouse on sunday . ” more happily , “ the puritans ” is the nickname for the only supporter - owned football club in oxfordshire , banbury united . i mention all this not just because i am really proud of where i call home and its role in our past , but because i want the house to understand what the banbury constituency is all about . although it did not change hands politically between 1922 and 2024 , change did come to banbury in a big way . old industries such as making cloth in chipping norton or aluminium in banbury went , while new ones such as logistics with companies such as dhl and twe haulage , food processing with fine lady bakeries and go fresh , and high - end mechanical engineering with the haas formula 1 team and prodrive came in instead . other industries , such as brewing , moved within the constituency . we can no longer get a pint in a hunt edmunds pub , but hooky beer from hook norton is on sale across the united kingdom . the building of the m40 in many ways permanently changed banbury from a small , semi - industrial market town into something completely different . thousands of new homes have gone up as our area has become increasingly attractive for commuters to oxford and london , but we still have a council waiting list that has quadrupled in a decade and a private sector that can not meet the need . meanwhile , vital infrastructure such as schools , roads and health services have failed to meet demand , posing fair questions from the community for those , like me , who support the government ’s ambitious house building agenda . while they have changed , banbury , chipping norton , charlbury and the villages of north and west oxfordshire have not lost their sense of community . the community united across political divides , and none , in defence of our local horton general hospital when it was faced with downgrading , successfully fighting it off in 2008 and less successfully in 2016 . as the use of food banks grew in the years after 2010 , people across the area came together to help support those in need . for example , the chippy larder in chipping norton has become a much - loved community resource . food security in banbury can not be considered without mentioning our rural farming communities and perhaps the most famous farm in the country : clarkson ’s farm . for all the entertainment that the series has provided , for me the most important aspect of it is the light that it shines on the huge challenges faced by our farmers , and not just in the banbury constituency but throughout the uk . i hope that the government ’s programme to support them will relieve many of the burdens that have made farming so challenging for so long . southill solar farm on the edge of the wychwood forest near charlbury provides community - owned power to 1,200 homes . that is another reason i am so passionate about this government ’s exciting agenda on renewable energy . then there is the volunteer driver service in banbury , taking the elderly or those less able to hospital and gp appointments at nominal rates . throughout the pandemic , as in other places , people across banbury worked hard to help those less fortunate during that most testing of times . banbury ’s community , led by some of its many thousands of polish citizens , got together again to gather supplies to support the ukrainian civilians fleeing that conflict , while welcoming others into their homes and communities . on that note , i pay tribute to my predecessor , victoria prentis . although there was much in the campaign that we disagreed on , this side of the house was united with the conservative party in support for ukraine . i pay tribute to victoria ’s decency and her clear compassion for humanity , exemplified as much by her taking a ukrainian refugee into her home as by her nine years of service to the community . as for myself , i stand here in support of this government and their mandate for change — something that banbury has a history of embracing . before i finish , i want to thank my family for their support , in particular my wife who , despite having multiple sclerosis , remains the strongest , most steady and most stable woman i have ever met . i stand here as someone banbury born and bred , ready to build a better britain and a better banbury , and i am determined to do it . i call claire hughes to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i am grateful for the opportunity to make my maiden speech today . i congratulate my hon . friends the members for ossett and denby dale ( jade botterill ) , for congleton ( mrs russell ) , for buckingham and bletchley ( callum anderson ) and for banbury ( sean woodcock ) on their excellent contributions today — my thanks to them all . it is the honour of my life to have been elected as the member of parliament for bangor aberconwy , and i offer my heartfelt thanks to everyone who supported me on my journey to this place : to my partner and my two kids , who i will not name — because my entry into the world of politics has already caused them enough embarrassment as it is — to my brother mike , my sister pam , my nieces and nephews , and all my friends back home ; and to my dad , who is watching from the gallery today , something that would never have been possible were it not for the incredible staff of ysbyty gwynedd , who have saved his life on more than one occasion . i want to thank my incredible campaign team , my agent jim hoey and ken stevens . i also pay tribute to the late councillor bill chapman , who is very sorely missed . without his encouragement much earlier in my career , i would not be here today . bangor aberconwy encompasses the former constituency of aberconwy , as well as parts of what were arfon and clwyd west . i thank all three of my predecessors , and their staff , for all their work in the support of local residents . robin millar served as the member for aberconwy from 2019 . i know that his work supporting hoteliers during the pandemic was very much appreciated . david jones served as the member of parliament for clwyd west and served in the role as secretary of state for wales during his time here . hywel williams served as the member of parliament for arfon and the previous caernarfon constituency for over 23 years — a member who was and still is very well respected by the communities that he served . i also pay special tribute to betty williams , who served as the labour mp for conwy from 1997 to 2010 . she is a real labour legend who is still remembered with huge fondness locally . if i can be half as good an mp as betty was , i will be doing okay . i have listened to many maiden speeches and noted that there is hot competition for whose constituency is the most beautiful in all the land — i am sorry , but game on ! bangor aberconwy includes the seaside resort of llandudno , the historic town of conwy , betws - y - coed , bangor pier , the carneddau mountains , the dyffryn ogwen valley — too many beautiful places to name . i must , of course , mention my hometown of penmaenmawr , which was the favoured holiday destination of prime minister william gladstone , and my adopted home of llanfairfechan . i have noticed , too , that it is customary to elaborate on one ’s political roots — childhood memories of being dragged along to party meetings or folding leaflets at the kitchen table — but i am afraid that was not me . politics was not really discussed in our house . for our family , direct action meant going out with a bucket and torch to rescue frogs . largely thanks to my mother , my formative years were spent bird watching , pond dipping , bat counting and on long mountain walks . my mum knew the value of our natural world and how vital it is that we protect it . i will make it my mission in this place to do so in her memory . when i was 11 , my mum ’s life changed . she enrolled on an access course , did a - levels , then graduated with a degree in botany — no mean feat with three young kids . the fact that she was able to access higher education is testament not only to the last labour government , but to the grit and determination of working people in our community . to understand why is to learn the founding story of bangor university : 140 years ago tomorrow , on all across bangor aberconwy , you will find incredible people who work hard day in , day out to support others in our community — people like jaynie black and the volunteers at ty hapus ; gini rivers and the friends of mostyn street ; brenda at hope restored ; the wonderful women i met last week at dyma ni befriending ; pobl i bobl ; maes ni ; hwb ogwen ; our food banks , our churches and our mosques ; and our town , city and community councillors . there are too many to mention , but we owe them all a huge debt of thanks . diolch o galon i chi gyd . [ translation : heartfelt thanks to you all . ] i am proud to be part of a labour government who are firmly on the side of working people . i am proud to be part of a labour government who are committed to breaking down the barriers to opportunity for young people growing up in communities like ours . and i am proud to be part of a labour government who understand that tackling the climate and nature crisis is not only the biggest challenge we face , but an opportunity for economic growth . the subject of today ’s debate is this week ’s record - breaking international investment summit . before coming to this place , i spent my career working with start - ups and smes , so i know how important economic and political stability is for business . under this new government , britain is truly the best place to do business , and there is huge potential in our corner of wales ready to be unleashed . we have a proud industrial history ; a wealth of talent in science and technology ; and wind , waves and mountain ranges . everywhere you look , you will find ingenuity and innovation , and communities full of pride , purpose and potential . to finish , i am proud of our past and i am excited for our future . whether you live in penmaenmawr or pwllglas , bangor or bontuchel , conwy or cerrigydrudion , i will fight tooth and nail to bring investment to our area , while promoting our welsh language and culture , to make sure that our young people know that these opportunities exist and are for them . there is much to do , and it will not happen overnight , but i hope to do every single one of my constituents proud . diolch . i call jessica toale to make her maiden speech . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i am grateful for the opportunity to give my first speech in the house as the new member of parliament for bournemouth west . over the last few weeks , it has been an absolute pleasure to hear the excellent maiden speeches of hon . members from across the house , including my hon . friends the members for ossett and denby dale ( jade botterill ) , for congleton ( mrs russell ) , for buckingham and bletchley ( callum anderson ) , for banbury ( sean woodcock ) and for bangor aberconwy ( claire hughes ) . i have to say that i have been absolutely blown away by the talent and dedication that all of these members have shown . it gives me lots of hope for the future , and i am honoured , truly , to be serving alongside them all . it is no coincidence that i have chosen to speak in the debate on the international investment summit today . although i was born in the uk , i grew up overseas and was always extremely proud to be british . wherever i went in the world , people knew what we stood for , and they were impressed with british leadership , excellence and expertise . wherever i went , people knew about britain ’s cultural contribution — from harry potter and shakespeare to the beatles and the premier league . this foundation , and my parents ’ and grandparents ’ encouragement to be curious about the world and to lend a helping hand wherever i could , took me into a career in overseas development , living , travelling and working in almost 100 countries . not only do i have members of my family in the gallery today , but i also have family friends from the united states , where we lived for eight years . this foundation meant that bournemouth was always at the heart of my life . my family live there now , and i have a very strong connection to the area from spending my summers there and getting that much - needed teenage freedom of being able to go to the beach with my friends , explore the town and explore the gardens . sadly , it is not something that parents feel they can do any more . over the years , not only has the reputation of this country that i love so much suffered , but the pride that the people in bournemouth feel in their town has faded , and this is a real travesty . do not get me wrong : i am still very resolutely proud to be british — for the record , i drive a mini and i have two english bulldogs — but this is what has catalysed me into this place to stand up for the people of bournemouth west , with a real desire to rebuild the bonds of community and to reignite the pride that we all have in our towns and our country . i want to congratulate the prime minister , the chancellor , the business secretary and all their teams on the investment summit . this was britain at its best : outward - looking , active and engaged on the world stage , and led by our values and by our mission . and i know that all the billions of investment that have come in will benefit all areas of the country — perhaps my hon . friend would like me to intervene ? yes , of course . i wonder whether she would be tempted to tell us about her favourite pub in bournemouth — or whether there are any bears around . there are no bears , i am afraid , but i will get to that . bournemouth will benefit massively from the innovation and investments that the investment summit has brought in . i know that my constituents will be keen to hear how our local businesses and our high street , and even their bills , will benefit from the summit . i want to take the opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor , sir conor burns . he served the constituency for 14 years , making it his home following his election in 2010 . as well as serving as a minister , sir conor was passionately dedicated to our local schools , bringing in investment for their improvement and improving opportunities for local young people — a tradition i am keen to continue . many hon . members will also know that sir conor was proudly devoted to the late mrs thatcher . in his own maiden speech , he stood in the same place that mrs thatcher stood to give hers , so perhaps the greatest tribute i can pay to him would be to continue that tradition in the same place here . i wish him all the best of luck in his onward endeavours . while he and i may have differed drastically in many of our views , we are here to provide a voice for the people of bournemouth west in parliament , and that is a role i will continue . i want to put on record my thanks to the great people of bournemouth west for giving me that opportunity to do so under a labour government . bournemouth is not natural labour territory , and i am really honoured to have won the trust of the people of bournemouth in becoming not just its first labour mp , but its first female mp . that is a monumental sign of the real changes we have seen in the constituency that are affecting it now and shaping its future . yes , we are a beautiful seaside town , with white sand beaches and picturesque parks — and our hotels , hospitality and cultural venues , and english language schools have attracted people for generations to visit , but also to seek a better quality of life — but there is so much more . bournemouth is a relatively new town , but parts of my constituency such as kinson were mentioned in the domesday book . scratch the surface just a little bit , and you will find a growing and vibrant community of innovators and creatives . we have world - leading graphic effects and post - production companies . we have a vibrant community of small businesses and vibrant high streets in winton and westbourne , with businesses that are integrating sustainability and also community into their business models . we have a burgeoning tech sector , with leadership in fintech , gaming and active travel . we have two world - leading universities and an excellent further education college , feeding that ecosystem and making sure our young people are equipped with the digital and creative skills they need to succeed in the 21st century — and i could go on . of course , there are challenges . like all seaside towns , we have seen our town centre decline . more than a decade of cuts to public services has meant that people now struggle to get an nhs dentist . crime and antisocial behaviour are at the forefront of people ’s minds as , for me , are parents who will not let their daughters go into the town centre at night . knife crime has destroyed lives , the housing market too often locks out young people and young families , and do not even get me started on sewage . but i feel hopeful about the future , and i feel hopeful because of the collective spirit that i see every day in my constituency , with people such as fran and jesse at the henry brown centre and kerry and her team at the bourne community hub working against the odds to build their communities and transform lives in neighbourhoods such as west howe and alderney ; all the community groups and resident groups fighting hard to improve their local areas and campaigning to protect our ancient heathland and our precious coastline ; and , of course , all of the businesses giving it a go , getting into our high streets and the town centre , breathing life back into empty shops and revitalising our heritage buildings . this is all really exciting stuff and i know that , with a new mission - led government , our town can and will be the safe and thriving hub it once was . i know that kids in west howe can and will have the same opportunities that our young people in talbot woods do to get a world - class education in their schools , colleges and universities . i want graduates who fall in love with bournemouth to find great jobs and affordable housing so that they stay and build their lives there . i want all of our businesses to thrive in the vibrant ecosystems that we are now developing , and families in wallisdown to get the support they need in their schools and not to worry about getting a dentist or a doctor . all of our residents , regardless of age or income , should feel proud of their town and their local neighbourhoods . three out of four people in my constituency at this general election voted for change . they did not all vote for me , but delivering that change is a responsibility i now embrace . i want to use it to build a better politics and a fairer future where everyone feels like they have a stake . so i am very excited and looking forward to working with the brilliant people of bournemouth west and our mission - led government to build the shared future and reignite this sense of hope not only in our special seaside town , but across the whole country . i congratulate my hon . friend in my previous life , before coming into this place , i spent eight years interviewing the leaders of international businesses , many of whom had long - standing commitments to investment in the uk , but who repeatedly told me and my former colleagues at the financial times that political instability was putting them off making future investments . that is why i very much welcome the remarks of our minister on the international investment summit and the importance of the private sector ’s partnership with our government . the 10 - year project that we have for national renewal , along with our 10 - year industrial strategy , shows our commitment to long - term economic ambition and planning . i congratulate the organisers of the summit , which brought together more than 300 industry leaders and secured more than £ 60 billion of investment . that is 60 % more than was raised last year , and it will create nearly 38,000 jobs , one of which is bringing elton john out of retirement . unfortunately , private investment in the uk since the global financial crisis has been much less “ rocket man ” , and more “ tiny dancer ” . over the last decade and a half , britain has experienced a much larger slowdown in the growth of capital intensity than comparative countries such as the us , france and germany , and it is that , alongside our skills growth , which accounts for our productivity puzzle . i very much welcome the appointment of john van reenen , the wonderful lse economist , to our council of economic advisors . he has done important work on productivity in the uk , and he suggests that our post - financial crisis fall in productivity growth is primarily due to a large fall in capital accumulation . in other words , british workers are being held back by low levels of public and private investment , and that is what our government need to unlock to succeed in our growth mission . we will provide stability , but stability alone is not enough . in the 21st century we must do more to provide industry and business leaders with the leadership that they require to navigate our increasingly complex geopolitical world , in which there is fragmentation of supply chains across the world , as well as the green transition . that means an industrial strategy . i welcome the publication of our government ’s industrial strategy earlier this month , and particularly the focus on life sciences as one of the key eight sectors for investment . my constituency of earley and woodley in the thames valley is a prime location for foreign direct investment , particularly in life sciences , and i am proud that the thames valley is the fastest growing region in the uk outside london . i congratulate the thames valley chamber of commerce , with which i have already worked in my first 100 days , on securing over the last decade more than 1,000 instances of foreign direct investment . we can measure the excitement of business and the private sector for our labour government by the amount of engagement i have already had from businesses in my constituency and through thames valley chamber of commerce . the biopharmaceutical group lonza , which is swiss in origin , received a grant of £ 30 million over the summer to expand and relocate to my constituency in the thames valley park , which is one of three business parks in the area alongside thames valley science park and green park . i recently met bayer , originally a german company , which employs hundreds of people at its headquarters in my constituency , and contributes to crucial health and life science research in the uk . advancements in life sciences have fundamentally improved not just the economy and innovation of the uk , but the length and quality of life here and around the world . that is why i welcome the health secretary ’s mission to ensure that the nhs receives the cutting - edge treatments being pioneered by companies in my constituency and beyond . life science investment , if done correctly , can be a significant driver of growth and productivity — our central mission . i look forward very much to meeting the minster for industry next week to discuss how we can give full range to life sciences companies in our constituencies , and to the clinical research taking place in the royal berkshire hospital , which is at the forefront of much research in medical trials . that hospital will benefit greatly from private and public investment . businesses do not exist in isolation , and what makes some countries prosper is the strength of their institutions . responsible and highly productive businesses wish to retain their skilled workforces , who require countries with well - functioning public service provision , infrastructure and accessible housing . those companies want political stability and a regulatory framework that works for business , workers , and the consumer . that is why labour ’s pitch to business does not end with the international investment summit , but continues with legislation that the government are passing , such as the employment rights bill . providing the foundations for businesses to thrive means fixing the foundations of our economy and society , and that is what i am proud to say our labour government will do . i call kanishka narayan to make his maiden speech . diolch yn fawr — thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the privilege of making my maiden speech in this house . i follow a long list of maiden speeches and so i perhaps offer no novelty , but i will take the opportunity of offering familiarity . i come to this debate on the international investment summit having spent the last decade on the frontline of investment , backing the inventors of artificial intelligence data and wider software businesses across this country and the united states . i therefore know the cause with depth and personal experience , and in particular i know that no working - age person in this country has seen a start - up go to the ftse top 10 . in the united states , eight out of 10 have experienced that . in the last decade of innovation , britons in this country and in the vale of glamorgan have been denied the opportunity of shaping their destiny . decline no more , because i know from speaking to investors , including those at the summit , that they believe what i know with this labour government : change is on the way and has begun . my role has been to put the vale of glamorgan front and centre in that wave of change , but i start by also recognising the dual impact that change in this house always has . for every maiden contribution , there is a contribution that has been , and in my case i wish to recognise that of my predecessor , the right hon . alun cairns , conservative mp for the vale of glamorgan for 14 years . in those 14 years alun served our constituency with sincerity . in fact , he was so sincere that i remember knocking on doors in cadoxton in barry with the best constituency labour party in the country , only to have my hopes dashed by a lovely elderly lady who said , “ i am going to be voting for alun , the best labour mp this town has ever had . ” we all carry an inflated sense of our personal vote in this house , beyond our political allegiances , but in that moment i have to say that i felt and saw one . i congratulate alun on his service and wish him the best with the inevitable duality of change that we share , but i also commit to him some continuity in the service that he and his predecessor , the labour mp john smith , offered the constituents of the vale of glamorgan — and continuity also because the cause of barry ’s development , which i know alun initiated , will echo for years to come as my top priority too . i offer continuity because in fact the vale of glamorgan stands out for its continuity . there is continuity as the world centre of education . it was in llantwit major and st illtud ’s church that the uk ’s first college was sited , not only home to st illtud , but also host to st david in the early sixth century . in was in cowbridge in 1795 that one of the first gorsedd of the bards was hosted by iolo morganwg , since then a font of appreciation for the welsh language , welsh literature and welsh poetry . there is continuity not just in education but in energy , with barry being the world ’s powerhouse and the largest coal exporting port in this country , and indeed the largest in the world in 1913 , and with aberthaw not just one of the most advanced power plants of its time , but now the host of my and my constituents ’ future dreams of a centre of excellence in green energy . alongside energy and education , there is continuity in the world ’s pinnacle of natural beauty — a title i will only share , perhaps , with my hon . friend finally , there is continuity not just across education , energy and the beauty that we have , but in the heart and humour of the people of the vale of glamorgan . barry is the town that hosts “ gavin and stacey ” , and in particular the heart and humour of uncle bryn , my favourite character , who when driving down the m4 blasting out james blunt songs has been a personal inspiration to me each time i leave this esteemed chamber for the even more esteemed comfort of barrybados . i have seen the heart of the community spirit across the vale of glamorgan in big bocs bwyd , which is an initiative across schools that started in barry and now goes beyond it , ensuring that no child goes hungry when they are learning . there is the real struggle and the fight that i see each week in the vale domestic abuse services in my constituency , fighting the onslaught of violence against women that we have seen not just in the vale but across this country , and there is the powerful heart of the voice choirs of barry , llantwit major and cowbridge , which were able to combine the pure heart of “ calon lân ” with the deep optimism of “ the greatest showman ” in one night . i come here with news of the heart and humour of the vale of glamorgan , but also to report its honest challenges . we have the honest challenge of barry , where , when delivering medicines as a volunteer , i learned that the pharmacist was issuing multiples of painkillers per patient , compared with the same pharmacist in cardiff . we have the honest challenge of our beautiful farmlands , where third and fourth - generation farming families are fighting a great but difficult fight against the combined challenges of weather , disease and uncertainty . we have the honest challenge of the veterans of the vale of glamorgan , who are not seeking the world , but simply seeking a bit of public service for the exceptional national service they gave us . money does not buy most things in life . it does not solve most of our problems , but its absence and the deprivation entrenched over the last decade are at the root of many of them . in particular , that has chipped away at the dignity of my community . that is why i come here with the twin ambitions of greater prosperity and a deeper bond of dignity in the vale of glamorgan and across the uk . i do so not as a political slogan or out of political theory , but out of a history of personal gratitude , because it was 22 years ago that the vale of glamorgan and south wales , including cardiff , offered a newly arrived set of parents the opportunity of a minimum wage and a night shift to subsidise the sleep of their young boys . in the absence of any holidays , it was barry island that first gave those two young boys the opportunity of relief , and perhaps even some delight , over the weekend . it was south wales , where i grew up with my brother in a situation of particular economic stress , where i felt , through the deepest privileges of education , that i could go on to advise the prime minister and the civil service , to advise ftse boards across the city , to invest in tomorrow ’s inventors and ultimately to stand before the house as wales ’s first member of parliament from an ethnic minority background . when i stand for my twin ambitions of prosperity and dignity for the vale , i will do so out of that personal history of gratitude . for as long as i serve as the vale ’s voice here in westminster , i will fight each day for the people in my community . i congratulate all my hon . friends on their deeply eloquent and moving maiden speeches this afternoon . it is a real pleasure to be in the chamber to hear them . i take this opportunity to commend those on the government front bench for a successful , record - breaking investment summit earlier this week . the investment of £ 63 billion represents a real vote of confidence in this government ’s mission to grow our economy . i welcome in particular the announcement this week of a five - year programme of investment at stansted airport , which is a major employer in our constituency of hertford and stortford . that programme totals £ 1.1 billion , including a £ 600 million investment in an extension to the airport ’s existing terminal . that investment in the east of england ’s largest single - site employer will not only provide an even better passenger experience , but help to connect our region ’s innovative sectors and creative industries with their international partners . in bishop ’s stortford , stansted airport is right on our doorstep , providing employment for around 1,500 residents in our town and surrounding areas . that contributes roughly £ 140 million in gross value added to our constituency . the terminal extension alone represents up to 5,000 additional on - site jobs , offering further employment opportunities for our residents and strong rail and bus links to our constituency , meaning that even more commuters will be able to take public transport to work . on that point , i welcome the recent department for transport announcement that contactless payments will be rolled out on the stansted airport line in 2025 . that will allow residents at bishop ’s stortford and sawbridgeworth stations to make use of tap in , tap out payments for the first time . that is an important step in improving rail travel for the many who rely on it in our constituency . the house may already know that stansted airport is the only major airport in this country with a purpose - built , on - site technical skills college , but i will tell the house more . stansted airport college offers vocational training opportunities to young people in our community , and it is delivering record numbers of apprentice students into employment in aviation , helping to fill urgent skills gaps in the sector with our local talent . under this government , i want hertford and stortford to be an even better place to live , work and learn . the investment promises to open new doors for our residents to new opportunities to gain skills for life and find meaningful work . it is also a clear signal that under this government , britain is once again open for business , and i hugely welcome it . i join in the congratulations of colleagues who have made excellent maiden speeches , including my hon . friend i congratulate the minister , my hon . friend as a former trade commissioner , i thank my former colleagues in the department for business and trade and in markets such as india for the incredible work they will have been doing to achieve that investment . i well remember the beavering away and constant phone calls to major investors at such moments . having been at the last summit , i am sure my invite to this one was lost in the post . i know from my time in india that international investors were already beginning to price in the benefits of a change in government . they see a labour government as a source of stability and predictability and the uk becoming a place for long - term , safe investment . that is the stability dividend that my hon . friend the minister has already spoken about . i just say that the £ 63 billion , while a record sum , is not enough for scotland . we have seen significant investment in the first 100 days , but we would like to see even more come north of the border , and in particular to communities such as mine in ayrshire . my hon . friends the members for ayr , carrick and cumnock ( elaine stewart ) , for kilmarnock and loudoun ( lillian jones ) and for north ayrshire and arran ( irene campbell ) are keen that increasing investment in ayrshire is at the forefront of ministers ’ minds . for the first time in 10 years , we have four ayrshire labour mps committed to growth and investment and a labour government who can deliver it . my hon . friends and i are working with the three local authority chief executives and the excellent principal of ayrshire college to develop that “ invest in ayrshire ” proposition , and we are looking at the opportunities for our region and our skills gaps , because 14 years of the tories and 17 of the snp have let communities in ayrshire down . our towns were promised funding by the last conservative government and we , like other communities promised that towns funding , are lobbying the minister for democracy and local growth , my hon . friend my right hon . friend the secretary of state for scotland is also working closely with us so that we can ensure that the ayrshire growth deal meets the real current and future needs of the ayrshire economy . in the thousands of conversations i had during the election campaign , it was clear to me that jobs , investment and growth will be the most significant change this labour government can bring to communities across ayrshire . my right hon . friend the secretary of state for business and trade visited prestwick airport during the election campaign , for which i am grateful , and he will remember that prestwick is scotland ’s aerospace hub , with 55 % of scotland ’s aerospace sector jobs . that sector already attracts international investment , but we want to do much , much more . similarly , we are looking at gb energy and this government to drive further green investment in ayrshire . we want to see parts of that green energy supply chain come to ayrshire . we have a positive story to tell about transforming our coalfields into clean power fields , and we are proud to host our fair share of wind farms , which play a significant role in ensuring the government meet their commitments to doubling onshore wind energy by 2030 . we have also seen investment in companies such as xlcc , a subsea cable manufacturer , which has secured £ 87 million from the uk infrastructure bank to invest in the development of new subsea cable factories in the scottish town of hunterston , which was once home to nuclear power in ayrshire . that industry is now on the way out , because of the failed policies of the snp , which include a nuclear - free scotland relying on english nuclear . i note that , once again , snp members are not in the chamber in an important debate for scotland ’s economy . when torness in scotland stops generating , and if no replacement capacity is built , the power generated in england when there is low wind output — as on monday this week , for example — will be needed to maintain supply in scotland , and it will be significantly based on nuclear energy . i was pleased that the last labour leadership of north ayrshire council welcomed the opportunity to restart the conversation with the nuclear industry in ayrshire , because the jobs and investment that the industry could bring would be significant . with ardagh glass , irvine continues to be a major centre for glass manufacturing — another industry that benefits from stability and predictability in policymaking and that is looking to make a significant investment in the green transition . to conclude , i hope my right hon . friend the secretary of state sees that there are significant opportunities for greater investment in ayrshire and will ask her brilliant colleagues in the office for investment to prioritise working with my colleagues and me to make that investment happen . i start by noting that we have on the government front bench two ministers who split their time between departments . one is at the treasury and the department for work and pensions , and the other is at the department for energy security and net zero and the department for business and trade . that just goes to show that we have a joined - up , mission - led government who are trying to move away from working in silos and to have a shared ambition , and that is to be commended . we are here today to talk about investment , which is obviously about money , but it is also — i would not want to lose this — about people . it is about skills , expertise , experience , opportunities for learning , better jobs , dignity at work , feeding families and enabling the maximum amount of prosperity . we should hold on to those things , because they are what our constituents want and what they send us to this place to deliver . that said , investment is also about the money . the £ 63 billion truly is a record - breaking amount , and i commend our mission - led government for securing it . it is the clearest sign that global businesses are backing the british economy and working people under this new labour government . that money could have gone elsewhere , but it is coming to our country , for all the reasons i just described . it is coming here because the country voted for change to achieve stability . in the last 14 years , we have had little to no growth , with billions of pounds of taxpayers ’ money wasted and a huge black hole in our finances . the country was left vulnerable to the worst cost of living crisis in a generation , and our government was forced to spend £ 94 billion on household support because we were so exposed to fossil fuels . that is why i am particularly pleased that so much of this investment is going towards clean energy . for example , some of the £ 2 billion from octopus energy will be used to build four new solar farms across bristol , wiltshire , essex and the east riding of yorkshire , powering up to 80,000 homes . those investments will improve our local economies and communities . i feel sad and wrong saying this , but we have been talking about elton john , and nobody else has made the inevitable point : sorry seems to be the hardest word , but we are not hearing it said , either in jest or in sincerity . as i look at the opposition benches , which are deserted , i wish that conservatives could speak up on behalf of british business—[interruption . ] i do apologise to as i said , neither this debate nor these investments are just about the money . hopefully , nearly 38,000 people across the uk , including in my home of bournemouth east , will begin new jobs as part of the green transition that our country so desperately needs and that our industrial sector has been crying out for . to that end , i very much welcome the publishing of the government ’s green paper on their 10 - year industrial strategy , which we have already heard about . in the short time i have been a member of parliament , the government have committed to strengthening britain ’s industrial base — in both the service and manufacturing industries — to create good , well - paid jobs in not only the green sectors we have today but those of the future . with the right policies , the government can supercharge investment in clean energy industries across the uk , from the industrial heartlands of the north to the thriving finance sector in bournemouth . this is about more than just creating green jobs ; it is about the revitalisation of entire regions and ensuring that every corner of our country benefits . i have been fortunate this week to spend time with investors , businesses and working people at three events in london , and the relief is palpable . i have listened to investors talk about how they have been holding on to money because they have been craving regulatory certainty ; planning reform ; the building of homes for their workers ; an nhs that can fix those workers , who they need at their workplaces but who are at home unwell , because of mental ill health , musculoskeletal problems or worse ; and the certainty from government that would remove the barriers to growth , so that the investments they make extract a dividend for not just their companies but our wider economy . when members hear that the investment we are talking about was lined up before the general election , they should not believe it . it came forward after the general election , because businesses now have a government who are committed to putting in place the infrastructure and changes needed for our economy to grow now and into the future . we know the benefits of action , and we know the costs of inaction , because we are bearing those costs now . working together , government , investors , working people , our trade unions , and businesses will achieve energy independence and security . we will achieve falling and lower bills . we will achieve good jobs and pride in our communities . together with our mission - led government , we will achieve a growing and improving economy and way of life . i now call the shadow minister , gareth davies . i thank all those who have spoken in today ’s debate . it is right that i recognise the contributions that have been made from both sides of the house , but especially those made by members making their maiden speeches . we all remember the moments leading up to and during our maiden speech , and it still gives me chills to this day . let me say to i had the pleasure of meeting finally , all jest aside , let me say genuinely from the outset that it is right that we welcome this government ’s building on the strong foundations for international investment in our country . as of july — a randomly picked month — the uk was europe ’s leader for new foreign direct investment projects for a third successive year , with the highest total number of projects in the past five years . the most recent official figures show that the uk ranked second only to the united states for greenfield fdi overall , while leading the world in investment into our renewables sector . that is one of the reasons why we have achieved the fastest decarbonisation of any developed country in the world , and we should be proud of that . that is down not just to those who are elected but to officials who work day in , day out to support governments : those in the office for investment , the treasury , the department for business and trade , and the foreign , commonwealth and development office , and our many trade commissioners , who help drive our efforts to attract significant pools of investment capital from across the world . this has been a good week for investment into our country—[interruption . ] it really has . it is important that we recognise the cross - party heritage of this week ’s summit , which i am sure the minister will acknowledge when she stands up . labour has carried forward good ideas that we conservatives either implemented or started in government . the government deserve credit and i am very happy to give it , because this was , in the end , a fine follow - up to the global investment summit pioneered this time last year . our cross - party collaboration does not end there . in many cases , this labour government have announced or re - announced investments that were negotiated or even agreed by their conservative predecessors . i guess some things sound so good that they are worth repeating . as my hon . friend whatever the origin , more private investment clearly benefits the british people , contributing to more jobs , better productivity and stronger growth . we can all agree on that point , and it should not be taken for granted . i commend the speech by my hon . friend however , we need to face the fact that this summit has been overshadowed by a rather large elephant in the room . as the transport secretary knows all too well , many investment decisions are provisional and dependent on an economic environment that welcomes and supports investment . since labour has taken office , thanks to all the doom and gloom , made - up black holes and submission to the unions , business and consumer confidence has fallen and the cost of borrowing for the british government has risen . we have had 100 days of self - contradiction and uncertainty . even in just a few months , this labour government have promised public investment while cutting capital expenditure , fretted over a supposed black hole while frittering away billions on pet projects and union paymasters , disavowed red tape while smothering small businesses in new regulations , and paid lip service to fiscal responsibility while laying the ground to fiddle the financial rules . meanwhile , almost every single revenue - raising policy in the labour manifesto has proven pretty much worthless , just like its promise not to raise national insurance . the rest of us were left wondering , and continue to wonder : if i make a successful investment , how much of the return will i be able to keep ? if i take on a new employee , how much tax will i need to pay for the privilege ? if i increase my workers ’ pay , what will the total cost be ? if i save for the future , will the government help themselves ? if i pass on the business i built all my life to the next generation , will they be penalised ? if £ 1 billion is jeopardised by bad labour commentary , £ 63 billion can be jeopardised by bad labour policy . investment and economic growth are not simply convened ; they take concerted effort , not contorted fiscal signals . some have questioned whether having the summit before the budget was putting the cart before the horse , but my worry is that , come budget day , the horse will already have bolted . i wonder , in the event that the budget backfires , will the prime minister be forced to disown or defenestrate yet another member of his top team , to avoid taking responsibility himself — sacrificing someone else on the altar of self - service ? as has been said before , labour ’s chaos might be in my party ’s interest , but it is not in the national interest . i want to see the promise of these investments fulfilled . labour must not put them at risk . let us build on the success of our country ’s economy and push up businesses that want to succeed , not pull them down when they do succeed . i am afraid that as long as this chaos , scandal and uncertainty continues , i will not hold my breath . i am so pleased to be closing this debate today , which in a parliamentary context draws to a close a hugely positive and successful week for the united kingdom . i thank all hon . members who contributed to the debate . i am disappointed that only one conservative mp managed to make it here to speak in the chamber and that nobody from the snp managed to come . i am surprised that they are not here to welcome the week we have had so far . the prime minister made this government ’s guiding mission clear from day one : we will go for growth at every opportunity , and we are doing that in spades . a week ago today , we launched our landmark employment rights bill to create more secure employment and a happier and more productive workforce . on monday , we launched our industrial strategy green paper , something business has been crying out for , which lays strong foundations for 10 years of growth and investment in our most important sectors . also on monday , the prime minister hosted some of the world ’s biggest investors to show them why , under this growth - driven government , uk plc will be a blue - chip company that they should invest in . as was mentioned , elton john was there to speak . i should tell the house that he took no fee — he took no fee . he wanted to come and celebrate with us the commitment of companies from across the world coming to the uk . before i talk a bit more about the investment summit , i want to pay tribute to the members who spoke today , in particular those who made their maiden speeches . as someone who wells up quite often and quite easily , this was a difficult debate for me . there were many moments when we looked up at the gallery and saw parents and other family members wiping tears from their eyes . it was lovely to see . i loved the motto of my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend diolch to my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend my hon . friend at the investment summit , £ 63 billion of investment was announced , more than double what was raised at the opposition ’s summit last year . iberdrola doubled its wind energy investment in the uk from £ 12 billion to £ 24 billion ; there was £ 10.5 billion from orsted and greenvolt , and more than £ 200 million from seah wind . there was £ 8 billion for carbon capture , which will create 4,000 jobs and support 50,000 ; £ 2 billion from octopus energy and £ 1.3 billion from macquarie for solar projects ; £ 6 billion of new money for data centres , on top of the £ 10 billion recently committed by blackstone and £ 8 billion from amazon ; £ 1 billion for dp world ’s london gateway , and £ 200 million for a new freight ferry terminal at the port of immingham ; more than £ 300 million for holtec ’s advanced engineering plant in south yorkshire ; £ 500 million from bmw group for battery energy storage ; more than £ 2 billion for rail and air projects from network rail and manchester airports group respectively ; and £ 400 million for life sciences and healthcare innovation . moreover , our fantastic imperial college london will put £ 150 million into a new r&d campus . on top of these transformational investments , we have proved our credentials as a pro - business government . thanks to the chancellor ’s announcement that the uk infrastructure bank would be turned into the national wealth fund , we are catalysing tens of billions of pounds of private investment into the uk ’s clean energy and growth industries , including green hydrogen , carbon capture and gigafactories . we are establishing an industrial strategy advisory council , led by clare barclay , to help deliver the pro - business environment on which our industrial strategy will depend . we are creating a british growth fund that will fuse pension investments and venture capital markets . we are expanding the office for investment to ensure that international investors receive the information and guidance they need to invest in britain , and we are cutting red tape to remove redundant reporting requirements , while making it easier for companies to re - domicile themselves in the uk — and all this within 100 days of our taking office . from more rights for a more productive workforce , to a pioneering industrial strategy for our sectors of the future , to scores of investments worth tens of billions of pounds , this government are delivering change . the last government ’s scattergun approach to growth left our country starved of investment , economically divided and struggling to maintain our competitive edge in the global economy . growth was anaemic ; wage growth flatlined on their watch . productivity was down ; the gap between france , germany and the united states doubled since 2008 . we saw the lowest investment share as a percentage of gdp in the g7 , and we ranked 27th out of 30 in the oecd last year . that is on top of the state of the public finances that the conservatives left us , with public services starved of investment , millions of days of work lost to strike action , and rocketing debt . however , in just 100 days this government have already laid down the blueprint for 10 years of growth through our biggest and most innovative sectors ; secured £ 63 billion in new investments that underline our potential as a world leader in renewable energy , life sciences , technology and clean growth ; and brought forward a raft of reforms to create a happier , more secure and more productive workforce . the minister is making a very interesting and important speech , and she has set out exactly what this government are doing to benefit my constituents . could she find some time to meet me so that we can discuss how together we can ensure that the people of newcastle - under - lyme and staffordshire more widely can benefit from the investment secured at the summit this week ? i am always happy to meet and to talk about what more we can do in our next 100 days , and indeed — we hope — our next five to 10 years in government . some conservative members have questioned whether some of these investments were teed up under the last government . they know perfectly well that business confidence can rapidly change investment decisions . all the announcements included are of new , firm commitments being made by companies to invest in the uk either when final investment decisions have been taken or when announcements have been accelerated or unlocked because of actions taken and support provided by this government . i am sure that conservative members will have seen the letter , published in the times at the start of the week , from five of the world ’s biggest banks , joined by private equity firms , insurers and tech giants , saying that it was “ time to invest in britain ” , and that britain ’s “ greater stability ” had increased its attractiveness to investment , which was of course a reference to labour ’s decisions when we took office . they concluded : “ we are optimistic about the future of the economy , and believe it is time to invest in britain . ” the fact that scores of investors attended our summit on monday , with tens of billions of pounds being firmly committed to new projects , shows that under this labour government , business and investors have a great deal of confidence in our growth mission . the minister is talking about confidence , but if confidence is rising , can she explain why the institute of directors has stated that confidence has gone from plus 30 in june to minus 7 today ? the shadow minister knows that we are working very closely with businesses , business organisations and others to ensure that the changes we bring in grow our economy . we have huge confidence from a raft of people . for every quote the hon . gentleman can find , i can find 10 that say the opposite . he can pick on one if he wants to , but i suggest that £ 63 billion does not lie . let us not forget that our summit on monday was organised in a matter of weeks . the conservative party had two years between their investment summits , yet we secured double the amount of investment compared with its summit last year . to respond to a couple of other points , the lib dem spokesperson , to summarise , across the house we are united in the belief that britain needs to facilitate growth . let us face it , we have been severely starved of it . only through growth can we keep taxes lower for working people , invest in our public services and create secure , well - paid , high - skilled jobs . of course , this is against a backdrop of the poor economic inheritance left by the conservative party , who lurched repeatedly from prime minister to prime minister , gave us seven growth plans in 14 years , made millions of people pay the price of a trussonomics budget and saddled the people of britain with a low - growth , low - productivity , low - investment economy . the steps that this labour government have taken in just 100 days show that we are overturning the conservatives ’ legacy of inaction , stagnation and deterioration , and creating a country of stability , innovation and prosperity . question put and agreed to . resolved , that this house has considered the international investment summit . motion made , and question proposed , that this house do now adjourn.—(gerald jones . ) i know that a number of colleagues have experienced similar problems in their constituencies to those i will be raising , and i will try to accommodate interventions . i welcome the minister for data protection and telecoms , my hon . friend “ we fully understand people ’s concerns about the excessive deployment of telegraph poles , and are urgently considering options to address this . ” as time is short , i will focus on the current absence of a requirement to consult residents under the legislative and regulatory regime that ministers have inherited . this is not about being against telegraph poles , nor is it about being against the roll - out of fast broadband . new infrastructure is vital in a society that is increasingly dependent on fast and reliable internet services . however , surely it is wrong that when poles are sited inappropriately , recourse for residents is advisory only , and , in many cases , completely lacking in practice . official statistics suggest that in my birmingham northfield constituency , almost 99 % of residents have access to superfast broadband . i know that ministers have some scepticism about the accuracy of those figures , but it is undeniable that broadband coverage is better than in neighbouring rural areas , yet urban areas are the current focus for the roll - out . the case for the changes in 2013 that established the current permitted development regime focused almost exclusively on the need to extend superfast broadband to rural areas and new - build estates . little to no consideration appears to have been given to how the legislation would impact already built - up , urban areas . the consequences are now being seen in south birmingham , as some residents are left to accommodate poles that are unwanted , unneeded and obtrusive . rose — rose — i will give way first to my near neighbour . my hon . friend is making an excellent speech , and it is much needed . as he said , many of our constituents already have excellent broadband , so telegraph poles should be strategically prioritised in rural areas . in one of my streets alone , there are five poles . i have previously asked the government how many poles they think is acceptable . does he agree that this is not the way that providers should behave ? i know that my hon . friend has been doing extensive work on this issue . there are similar problems in my birmingham northfield constituency , and i would be sympathetic to having different approaches in rural , semi - rural and built - up urban areas , precisely because of the issues she raises . i thank my hon . friend for organising this excellent debate . telegraph poles are a key issue in my halesowen constituency . my constituents support the roll - out of high - speed broadband , but they are concerned about the installation of telegraph poles in areas that did not previously have them . community engagement has not been done well — i give the example of the squirrels estate in my constituency , where a recent campaign , which i supported , was successful in stopping a company rolling out telegraph poles in an area that did not have them . the residents ’ major concern was about the use of underground ducting . does my hon . friend agree that if there is accessible infrastructure underground already , broadband providers should use that ? the government should change the regulations so that providers are able to share the infrastructure , even if they are competitors . i thank my hon . friend for making those points . he highlights issues that are common across the wider region and , i suspect , the country . i will come on to some of the regulatory changes that could be made , but it is important to recognise that there was a requirement for companies to share infrastructure wherever possible . however , i will discuss some of the cases in my constituency where that clearly is not happening . i want to draw attention to some of the problems in my constituency . i recently attended a residents ’ meeting in a street in birmingham northfield called pineview , a quiet cul - de - sac that is set back from a busy road . the community is close - knit , and over the years , the residents have invested their time and a considerable amount of money to ensure the upkeep of the area . they have lived with underground telecommunications infrastructure , which serves different operators , and they have experienced a positive service . however , residents report that four telegraph poles were installed on the road last year , starting early in the day and finishing late at night , with intrusive spotlights to facilitate the work . there was very limited community engagement , despite the residents taking up the company brsk ’s suggestion that a petition be collected . that was done , but to no effect . i also draw attention to lovell close in weoley . it is another small cul - de - sac , with only half a dozen houses and narrow pavements , but activities by two competing companies are now causing obstruction for residents and users of an adjoining public park . the hope that the infrastructure would be shared is not being observed in practice , and there are ongoing problems with pavement parking across south birmingham . i know that transport ministers are looking separately at this issue , but the fact is that the combination of pavement parking and the loss of pavement space to poles has created obstructions and pinch points . this is a particular problem for those with prams and mobility scooters . there are also problems in the bournville conservation area , which i discussed recently with the bournville village trust . i place on record my thanks for the local representations that have been made to me in advance of this debate by councillors esther rai , miranda perks and jamie tennant in my constituency , and liz clements and fred grindrod in the neighbouring ward of bournville and cotteridge . i also want to mention the work done on this issue by my constituency neighbour , my hon . friend in stourbridge in the west midlands , we face similar problems with the same company , which is causing havoc . as my hon . friend rightly says , the legislation was passed in 2013 , yet in 2024 , we are still waiting for the full roll - out of ultrafast broadband . although i appreciate what he says about our current adequate speeds , they could be much faster . when i was recently in ukraine , i experienced far better internet connectivity than i do in central london or stourbridge town centre . our european neighbours are enjoying much faster broadband while we languish behind , and stourbridge residents have been left at the mercy of these third - party companies — order—[interruption . ] the hon . lady might like to sit while i am standing . i have previously told members that interventions should be short and spontaneous . it is not an opportunity to read out a pre - prepared speech . if she wanted to speak in this debate , she could have asked permission from both the minister and the member in charge , and that would have been acceptable . thank you , madam deputy speaker . i completely agree with my hon . friend i will be brief , madam deputy speaker . i wholeheartedly agree with my hon . friend i completely agree with my hon . friend , who makes his case well . this is not about saying that there can never be telegraph poles , as there are some areas where they are clearly the right solution . however , there must be a proper process , and companies can not be left to mark their own homework . he highlights well the issues in his constituency . one of the few requirements placed on network operators is to provide 28 days ’ notice in writing to the local planning authority when they propose to put up a pole . that is a very low bar . without commenting on an active investigation , it should be noted that ofcom is currently investigating brsk for an alleged failure to notify birmingham city council 28 days prior to installing poles . it is important that the investigation is concluded quickly . i understand that the industry body , the internet service providers association , which i thank for providing a briefing ahead of the debate , is working on a potential revision to the cabinet and pole siting code of practice . i hope we will hear something encouraging from the minister but , as long as the code remains voluntary , it will always be circumvented in some cases . the code of practice merely states that , following advice for engaging and consulting residents , the code operator should place a site notice in “ as close proximity as possible … if an appropriate place to site a notice is not available , another means of informing residents may be discussed and agreed upon . ” in seeking to address these concerns , a number of residents in my constituency have , individually and collectively , attempted to follow the steps set out in the code of practice , including the complaints process . however , the code of practice , in its current form , fails to provide sufficient redress . it states that a complaints procedure should be in place , but it fails to go further than a company providing written responses detailing why a complaint is accepted or rejected . frankly , that is not good enough . we must focus on preventing poor practice , as well as encouraging the best . i thank the minister for his engagement with hon . members across the house on this issue . does he agree that , in pursuit of the government ’s welcome manifesto commitment to a renewed push for full gigabit coverage by 2030 , a better code of practice is needed ? does he agree that there is a natural conflict of interest in allowing broadband companies to be the sole arbiters of their own practice ? and does he further agree that there should be a role for ofcom in upholding the code ? i thank the minister for his attention , and i look forward to hearing how he proposes to engage with members across the house on this important issue . i am sure we will all hear more about this problem throughout the course of this parliament . as this is the first time that i have seen you in the chair , madam deputy speaker , may i say how glad i am that you were elected ? i voted for you , so there . [ laughter . ] it is a secret ballot , so you ca n’t check . i congratulate my hon . friend i am delighted to have the opportunity to have this debate . i will be very clear : the vast majority of companies operating in this sphere are doing so entirely responsibly . they are doing a great favour for the nation in rolling out broadband of the kind of speed that everybody wants . i note the point that my hon . friend the vast majority of companies are operating responsibly but , frankly , a few are behaving like cowboys . as a government and as a parliament , i think we sometimes need to say to cowboys that they are drinking in the last chance saloon . i have made that abundantly clear to some of the operators . i know that some operators are striving to co - operate with one another and with bt openreach to ensure that no unnecessary street furniture suddenly appears and that there is full consultation with the local community before a road is dug up for a new duct or a new pole appears . companies that are abiding by the code of conduct and fulfilling their obligations are almost as fed up as my hon . friend the member for birmingham northfield and other hon . friends ; indeed , i am sure we could fill the whole chamber with hon . members who are equally fed up with the few companies that are bringing the whole system into disrepute . that matters , because in the end the most important thing is that the wider strategy is right . we want to deliver good - value , very high - speed , more than ultrafast , gigabit - capable broadband based on fibre to the whole uk as fast as possible without having to provide vast amounts of taxpayers ’ money . we therefore need to do so on the basis of commercial roll - out . of course it is right that that should not be on the basis of monopoly and that competition , where possible , should drive choice for consumers and cheaper prices . that part of the strategy is absolutely right . the part of the strategy that the previous government were a bit more relaxed about — in fact , ministers used to say categorically that they were completely relaxed about it — was overbuild . that has meant several companies digging up the road one after another , as has happened in some parts of the country . it has also meant several companies deciding that they need their own set of poles , or poles appearing in an area that had never previously had poles and in which ducts had been laid out but not used . i am not completely relaxed about overbuild . i am concerned about it , because i know that a lot of constituents up and down the land are concerned . however , i want to make sure that commercial operators that are abiding by the rules and the code of conduct have every opportunity to continue to do so , in order that their commercial investments are not disrupted unnecessarily and we can deliver the infrastructure that we need across the whole united kingdom . in the end , i want the cheapest possible prices for people and the highest possible capacity across the network for every property in the land . i would issue one slight corrective in this debate . sometimes people say that this is a battle between urban and rural , but in fact some of the issues in urban areas are completely different from those in rural areas , and some are identical . i am not sure whether that dichotomy is fair . my preference is for ducts wherever possible . that is not always possible , for a whole series of different logistical reasons in different areas . it is an undeniable fact that providing connectivity via poles is likely to be something like 10 times cheaper than doing it via ducts , so i fully understand why commercial operators want to install poles . i understand that that could mean that there will be poles in areas that have never had them before , and , in some areas , that is something that we will have to live with . i thank my hon . friend for giving way , and i agree with almost everything that he has said . i also wish to reflect on the moving tribute that he made to a predecessor member for king ’s norton . i understand the case that my hon . friend has made , and i welcome his comments . does he accept that , when the price of poles is already cheap , there is a risk that some companies will undercut each other on consumer service to reach lower margins ? that is at the heart of the issue that we are debating today . it is about those operators and local cases in which standards have not been followed . good network providers should have nothing to fear from the changes that have been suggested tonight . yes , i agree with every word that my hon . friend has just said . he put it extremely well . he probably ought to be the minister , and perhaps he will be soon . he is right . i also want to say that we should have shared infrastructure wherever that is possible . legislation already makes provision for some of that to happen . in speaking to the operators , i have laid it down quite firmly that we need to enhance that infrastructure . i can perfectly understand why a commercial operator might say , “ well , i am not sure that i really want to share with my competitor ” . that is why a new code of conduct has taken a while . i hope that new code of conduct , which i have discussed with the operators , will be laid out very soon . there is urgency about this , because the roll - out is happening this week , next week and the week after . we need to tackle these issues in short measure , not wait a long period of time . at the very latest , this code of conduct will be published in the early new year , and i encourage everybody in the sector to abide by the code . i encourage competitors to tell the two or three companies that are not playing by the rules that they are bringing all of them into disrepute . the single most important issue for most of these operators is how they will drive take - up . it is about not just roll - out — that is their investment — but take - up . when we talk about 100 megabits per second — or about gigabits per second — many people have no idea what we are talking about . the truth is that all of our homes and businesses will need much greater broadband capacity in the near future , so we do have to roll this out . we have to make sure that people understand why they need it . the danger is that , if this whole process undermines confidence in the roll - out , it will affect take - up . it is in the commercial interests of everybody to make sure that we come to a better set of solutions in this area . let me go through a couple of the specific points that my hon . friend raised . as he knows , the cabinet siting and pole siting code of practice was issued in november 2016 . it sets out guidance on best practice relating to deployment , encouraging operators to site apparatus responsibly and engage proactively with both local authorities and the local community , and he laid out some of the specifics that follow on from that — the 28 days ’ notice that needs to be given to local councils and so on . there are some operators — not the ones my hon . friend is talking about , but for instance , ix wireless , which i had in my office earlier this afternoon — that are operating a different model , and a different set of issues relates specifically to them . there , too , i have tried to make it clear what government expectations are . as i say , following a meeting with the operators , the industry has committed to revising the code of practice , which i think will be much tougher , and the guidance should be published in the new year . however , i am absolutely clear that if voluntary adherence does not work , we reserve the right to change the law . we are in earnest about that , because we are aware of the concerns people have expressed . my hon . friend is also right to say that ofcom has stated that it would investigate any cases where poles are sited in a way that is not consistent with the requirements and guidelines in place , including where they block residents ’ drives or where operators systematically fail to engage with local planning authorities ’ suggestions . as my hon . friend has already referred to , ofcom has opened an investigation into whether brsk has failed to comply with its obligations . i am keen to have a meeting with brsk , and i hope that will happen in the next few weeks . i do not want to interfere in the process that ofcom is engaged in ; that is a matter for ofcom and i would not seek to undermine what is effectively a quasi - judicial operation . however , i want to make sure that brsk fully understands the concerns not only of many birmingham mps — i noted the contribution of my hon . friend i commend my hon . friend the member for birmingham northfield for getting the debate so early in his time as a member of parliament . he is obviously going to be a doughty defender of the rights of his constituents . madam deputy speaker , i noticed that you were nodding along — i know you are not really allowed to do that . you are shaking your head as well — you are not allowed to do that either . none the less , i think you broadly agreed with the thrust of what i was saying , so i feel as if i have united the house . on that note , i bid you farewell . question put and agreed to . house adjourned . thank you , madam deputy speaker , for the opportunity to deliver my maiden speech in this important debate on international investment , the benefits of which will be felt right across all regions of our country . i want to begin by paying tribute to my predecessor , mark eastwood . he was a dedicated servant to his previous constituency of dewsbury . on behalf of myself and our community , i say thank you . being the member for the area in which i grew up is truly the honour of my life . i will forever be grateful to the people across ossett and denby dale who put their faith in me to represent the area that i proudly call home . i pay tribute to the labour members across the constituency , especially stalwart member robert gosling , without whom i would not be standing here today . i would also like to take the opportunity to thank my parents for their support , as well as my brother , who has always been there for me during some of the most challenging times . i am delighted that they have travelled from wakefield to be in the public gallery today . their own commitment to our community in their long careers of public service — working hard and talking straight — are principles that i hope to emulate here . my mum is so committed to the north that this is her first ever trip to london — proof , were it ever needed , that us northerners only come south if somebody makes us . i know many members have already spoken about the beauty of their patches , but with respect , i must make the case for ossett and denby dale . driving from ossett towards the wakefield rural villages and into denby dale , the sky widens and the moors roll out before you . on that drive , when i see the emley moor mast appear from the horizon , built taller than the eiffel tower , i know i am home . it is beautiful , it is yorkshire and it is the place that made me who i am today . it is not just those moors and views that move me ; it is also the people who call them home . we are people of talent , community and , as good yorkshire folk say , hard graft . in fact , that beautiful landscape is the fruit of exactly that graft , of that talent . you see it in the pits dug across the countryside that served to fuel and heat our nation . you see it in the fields — ploughed , planted and grazed by countless generations to feed not just yorkshire but the rest of the country . you see it in the town markets , which have bustled with small traders , craftsmen and local farmers for generations . that landscape is not just the cradle of talent , but a product of it . each town , each village has its own community , its own culture — all quietly , proudly distinct . as well as hard work , these towns and villages are famous for their culture , their creativity and their heritage — home to brass bands , morris dancers , maypoles and even a doctor who , but most importantly of all , the world ’s greatest rugby league team , wakefield trinity . labour may be a party of the union , but in west yorkshire , when it comes to rugby , we watch the proper stuff and as you will know , madam deputy speaker , that is league . we are also home to yorkshire sculpture park , with its barbara hepworths and henry moores , and the national coal mining museum , which roots us in our proud history . i am enthusiastic — sometimes maybe a little too enthusiastic — that my constituency contains so many wonderful pubs and brewers . we have the ever expanding ossett brewery and our famous yearly festival , ossett beercart . just as we work hard and play hard , we also pie hard . indeed , for over 200 years , the people of denby dale have marked special occasions in the only way i think appropriate : by baking enormous pies to feed thousands — some even as long as 40 feet , with nine tonnes of filling and 200 pints of bitter . that history and that culture must be championed . it is yorkshire culture ; it is our culture . but i refuse to talk about my community only in the past tense — about opportunities we used to have and industries we used to lead . indeed , i want my successors in this place to be celebrating the creativity and achievements of children being born in my constituency today . sadly , however , the social mobility commission recently reported that many young people in ossett and denby dale , and other post - industrial communities across our nation , face an uphill battle . growing up in a rural town , i know that feeling all too well : that the place you are from is overlooked — forgotten , even ; that opportunities are few and far between ; and that the only path to success in life is leaving your family , your friends , your home . after briefly living in london in my twenties for work , i remember feeling like the token northerner with the funny accent . i found myself having to speak eloquently so folk down here could actually understand me . the only problem with that was that when i got back home , my friends and family would ask me why i was speaking so posh . it actually made me feel quite lost . young people in ossett and denby dale , and in towns and villages across our country , should not feel like they have to get out to get ahead — and yet so many of them do . to talk solely about what was once possible in our community is to betray those young people . instead , our politics must be built on their dreams and on their potential : decent , secure jobs with reliable public transport to get them there ; good affordable housing where they can build their families and their future ; high - quality education and skills training ; access to creativity and culture ; aspiration , hope . england is a nation of towns and villages like mine — of community , of culture , of graft . for england to succeed , towns and villages must succeed , and it will be my mission in this place to see that happen . i thank the shadow minister for his response , and welcome him to his place . i know that he will want to be a keen champion for the early years sector , and i was glad to hear him welcome the update that i have given to the house . as i said in my statement , labour is committed to the delivery of expanded entitlement across government . the last government left significant challenges , but we are not shirking that responsibility . with labour , the early years sector can rest assured that we will be working tirelessly to deliver a wider sea change in early education , as well as high and rising standards throughout the education system . let me now deal with some of the hon . gentleman ’s specific points . it is clear to me from my consultation and engagement with parents and providers so far that we have inherited a pledge without a plan , and the consequences of that are inherited delivery challenges relating to workforce and places . i appreciate the points that the hon . gentleman made about the workforce ; i believe by resetting the relationship with the workforce , we can have a much more positive relationship with the sector in the future . over 300,000 children have benefited from the entitlement offer since september this year , which demonstrates that we are actively engaging and working with parents to promote opportunities to take up the offer . we will continue to do so . on school - based nurseries , the pilot during the testing phase is for 300 places from april . our ambition is for 3,000 places over the course of this parliament . i look forward to working with the hon . member constructively to bring about the change that early years education so desperately needs . i thank my hon . friend for his question . i am absolutely delighted to hear of his enthusiasm for the scheme , which will make a huge difference to communities up and down our country . we are starting a test - and - learn phase in april ; the roll - out will be in september . we want to learn from that approach , and i would be delighted to work with him on this matter . i beg to move , that this house has considered the international investment summit . i am delighted to open this debate on the government ’s inaugural international investment summit , which we hosted at the guildhall in london on monday . leaders of the world ’s biggest companies , from alphabet and blackrock to goldman sachs and novo nordisk , came from all corners of the globe to meet government ministers and to listen to what our new government had to say . our message at the summit was clear : the uk is open for business once again . we have turned the page on the stagnation and instability of the previous government , and in just over 100 days , this government have put growth front and centre of our agenda and reassured investors that we will create the very best conditions for them to invest and to grow their businesses , restoring the economic stability and confidence for which businesses have been crying out for too long . the prime minister and the chancellor made it clear that the uk has an enormous amount to offer , as did all the high - profile investors who spoke at the summit , including esteemed business figures such as larry fink , eric swartz , ruth porat and more . we have made clear our commitment to growth and restored economic stability , and we have given businesses the confidence that they need for the long term . businesses are safe in the knowledge that the uk at last has a government whose central mission is to grow the economy and stimulate private investment , thereby ending the chaos and churn of the last 14 years . as both the prime minister and the chancellor have set out , increasing investment into the uk is the government ’s no . 1 priority to drive growth . our mission - driven approach allows us to think in terms of years , not weeks , and to commit to the hard yards required to break down the silos that have too often prevented effective government and got in the way of real growth - driving change . this is about ambitious policymaking for the long term , not sticking - plaster politics . as the chancellor said earlier this week : “ if the challenge is growth , investment is the solution . ” i am delighted to say that , as a result of the stability dividend introduced by this government , we announced a record - breaking £ 63 billion of shovel - ready investments across the country — more than at any previous summit , and more than double the total of last year ’s summit — from global companies such as eli lilly , servicenow , holtec and many others .